I/
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
WITH
THE  ANDAMANESE.
COMPILED  FROM  HISTORIES  AND  TRAVELS,  AND  FROM  THE  RECORDS  OF  THE
GOVERNMENT  OF  INDIA.
BY
M.  V.  PORTMAN,  M.A.I.,  ETC.,
FBLLOW   Of    THB    UUIVEBSITt    OF    CALCUTTA,
OFFICEE  IN  CHAEGE  OP  THE  ANDAMANESE.
VOL.  I.
CALCUTTA :
OFFICE  OF  THB  aOPBBINEENDKNr  OF  GOVERNMENT  PRINTING,  INDIA.
1H99.
gtice   ^?MP<C>   Sen   ot
MICROFILMED  BY UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO     j
LIBRARY MASTER  NEGATIVE  NO.:
...3.3.PJ.&J  
CALCUTTA :
GOY1BNMINT  OF   INDIA  CBNTRAt  PRINTING  OFFICE, 8,   HASTINGS  STBIKT.
as
A5&1
v,  I
INTRODUCTION.
rjlHIS  book  has  been  written  at  the  request  of  Lieutenant-Colonel R.  C.  Temple,  C.I.E.,  Chief  Commissioner  of  the  Andaman  and Nicobar  Islands,  who,  on  assuming  that  office  in  August  1894,  was anxious  that  the  records  of  the  Government  relations  with  the  Anda- manese, which  were  perishing,  with  all  that  had  been  written  about this  interesting  race  before  our  occupation  of  their  islands,  should  be condensed  into  one  work  before  it  was  too  late.
After  giving  a  description  of  the  Andaman  Islands,  and  of the  appearance  and  customs  of  the  Andamanese,  I  quote  all  that  has been  written  about  those  islands  from  the  earliest  times  up  to  the date  of  our  first  Settlement  on  them  in  the  last  century ;  and  the present  work,  if  not  containing  all  that  is  known,  at  least  has,  between two  covers,  a  larger  number  of  the  earlier  records  than  any  other ;  for in  addition  to  the  assistance  afforded  me  in  this  direction  by  Colonel Yule's  article  on  the  Andaman  Islands  in  the  ninth  edition  of  the Encyclopedia  Britannica,  and  by  Mr.  Man's  book,  "  The  Andaman Islanders";  copies  have  been  made  for  me  of  documents  in  the libraries  of  the  India  Office,  of  the  British  Museum,  and  of  the  Home Department  of  the  Government  of  India,  in  Calcutta.
I  then  include  all  that  can  be  discovered  regarding  our  occupation of  the  Andamans  from  1789  to  1796,  and  am  indebted  to  Mr.  E.  H. Man,  C.I.E.,  for  a  copy  of  Lieutenant  Colebrooke's  little  known  paper on  the  Andamanese,  one  of  the  most  important  extracts  in  the  book ; the  few  notices  of  the  Andamans  which  are  found  between  1796  and 1857  are  then  given,  including  the  interesting  account  of  the  wrecks
IV  INTRODUCTION.
Mr.  E.  H.  Man,  C.I.E.,  aud  Mr.  3?.  E.  Tuson,  have  also  assisted ine  regarding  matters  which  have  occurred  before  I  came  to  Port  Blair, and  about  which  the  records  are  either  silent,  or  are  altogether  missing.
M.  V.  POHTMAN, Officer  in  charge  of  the  Andamanese.
PORT  BLAIR,  ANDAMAN  ISLANDS  ; The  28th  April  1896.
CONTENTS.
CHAPTER  I.
Position,  and  physical  geography  of  the  Andaman  Islands— Their  geo- logical  formation— Dr.  Rink's  remarks— Mr.  R.  D.  Oldham's  re- marks—Notes on  the  subsidence  of  the  islands— Dr.  Praia's remarks— Narcondara— Barren  Island — Piracies,  and  kidnapping  of the  Andamanese  for  slaves,  by  the  Malays— The  harbours  of  the Andamans — Tbe  climate  of  the  Andaraans— Seasons — Andaman Forests — Fauna— Tlie  Andamanese — Theory  of  a  Negrito  popula- tion in  a  now  submerged  tropical  continent — Remnants  of  the Negrito  race— Numbers  of  the  Andamanese  at  the  time  of  our occupation  of  the  islands  in  1358— The  Kitchen-middens  in  the Andamans— Legends  of  the  Andamanese  regarding  the  antiquity  of the  race— Views  of  the  Malays  about  the  Andamanese,  and  their name  for  the  islands  and  people— Identity  of  the  Andamanese  ivith the  Hannmans  of  the  Ramayana  .  .  .  j   2n
CHAPTER  II.
The  Andamanese — Their  division  into  tribes— The  sub-division  of  the tribes  into  septs— Their  division  into  Ar-jawto  and  Erem-taga— Description  of  the  Lv-t/aMo  and  Erem-taga— Physical  characteristics of  the  Andamanese— Diseases  of  the  Andamanese — Intelligence  of
the  Andamanese— Tattooing — Names — Nicknames — Flower  names  
Marriage— Medicines— Motions,  etc.— Habitations — Government  
Language— Initiatory  ceremonies— Marriage— Burial— Customs  at meeting  and  parting— Fires— Religion,  traditions,  and  supersti- tions—Attire— Time— Trade— Sport — Canoes — Cooking — Weapons, utensils,  and  ornaments — Amusements  ...  gl   49
CHAPTER  III.
Early   accounts   of   the    Andaraanese — Claudius   Ptolemy — Renandot and  Arab  notes— The  travels  of  tsvo  Muhamrnedans  through  India
CONTENTS.
PAGE.
and  China — Pemberton — Harris's  collection  of  voyages  and  travels- Marco  Polo— Colonel  Yule — Friar  Odoric — Nicolo  Conti — Dr.  Anderson— Dr.  Careri— Cesare  Pederiei— Hamilton — Establish- ment of  the  Settletneut  in  1789 — Lieutenant  Colebrooke's  journal — Lieutenant  Colebrooke's  monograph  on  the  Andamanese— Notes  on the  monograph  .........  50 — 79
CHAPTER  IV.
Lieutenant  Blair's  notes — Barren  Island— Establishment  of  the  Settle- ment— Extracts  from  the  Calcutta  Gazette — Change  of  the  Settle- ment from  the  South  to  the  North  Andaman— Sickness — Abandon- ment of  the  Settlement — Major  Kyd's  reports  on  the Andaraanese — Voyage  de  Gaul  Sohouten  aux  Indes  Ori^ntales — Ritchie's  survey  of  the  Andaman  Islands — Extract  from  the Calcutta  Monthly  Register — Major  Symes'  account  of  the  Anda- manese— Notes  ou  the  account  ......  80 — 115
CHAPTER  V.
Acdamanese  taken  to  Penang  in  a  junk,  after  a  fight— Mr.  J.  B. Rodyk's  account — Rendezvous  of  the  British  fleet  in  Port  Cornwallis in  182-4  —Mr.  J.  E.  Alexander's  visit  to  the  Little  Andaman — Mr. Piddington's  visit  to  Landfall  Island — Malcolm's  account— Dr. Heifer's  murder  by  the  Andamanese — Account  of  the  wrecks  of  the British  Ships  Briton  and  Runnymede  ou  the  Arciiipela^o Islands  of  the  Andiimuns — Mr.  Quigley's  account — Settlement  on the  Coco  Islands — Wreck  of  the  Emily — Wreck  of  the  Flying Fish  .  .  •  ........  116 — 184i
CHAPTER  VI.
Murder  of  three  seamen  of  the  Fyze  Bukth  by  the  Aniamanese — Decision  of  the  Government  of  India  to  establish  a  Settlement  on  the islands — The  aborigines  were  not  to  be  harmed — Case  of  the  Fiien Gr«« — Mr.  Dalrymple's  letter — Mr.  Grey's  letter — Captain Hopkinson's  letter — Sir  A.  Bogle's  letter — Mr.  Hau^li  ton's  letter, and  the  accompanying  depositions — Despatch  to  the  India  Office, and  rejily — Despatch  to  the  India  Office  .....  1S5— 207
CONTENTS.  vii
PAOR. CHAPTER  VII.
Formation  of  the  "  Andaman  Committee  " — Captain  Man  directed  to take  possession  of  the  Andaman* — Policy  to  be  observed  towards  the Andamanese — Dr.  Mouat's  book — Comments — N"tes  on  the Andamanese  man  taken  to  Calcutta  by  Dr.  Mouat — Despatch  from the  "Andaman  Committee'" — Letters  to  Captain  Man — Despatch from  the  Court  of  Directors  ....  208 — 252
CHAPTER  VIII.
Opening  of  the  Settlement  by  Dr.  Walker —Trouble  given  by  the convicts  escaping — Severe  measures  taken — Inefficient  guard — Letter  to  Dr.  Walker — Measures  taken  to  improve  discipline  and health— Search  for  thatching1  leaves  resulted  in  a  collision  with  the aborigines — Guard  strengthened— Enlargement  of  the  Settlement— Dr.  "Walker's  proposals  for  the  protection  of  the  aborigines. Answers  of  the  Government  of  India — Viper  Island  occupied — The Andamanese  collect  in  large  numbers,  and  are  hostile — Attacks  by the  Andamanese— Ths  "  Battle  of  Aberdeen" — Dudhnath  Tewari's account  of  the  Andamanese — Remarks  on  the  account — Boorhana's false  account  of  the  Andamanese — Boorhana's  account  of  a  wreck  on Rutland  Island — Dr.  Walker's  resignation — Captain  Haughton succeeds  him  .  ...  .  258—25
CHAPTER  IX.
Captain  Haughton  visits  Penang  and  Achin,  to  look  for  Andamanese — Andamanese  in  Siam — Captain  Haughton's  reforming  and  en- lightened policy — Andamanese  behave  better — Cyclone — Naval Guard  attacked  by  Andamanese — Captain  Haughton's  report  on the  Andaxnanese — Dr.  Gamack,  and  Lieutenant  Hellard  began  to make  friends  with  the  Andamanese — Dudhnath  Tewari  released — Andamanese  af-.  South  Point— Andamanese  landed  on  Viper  Island and  were  friendly — Change  in  their  attitude — Petty  attacks — Further  visits  of  the  Andamanese  to  Viper  Island— Fight  on  Viper Island  with  the  Andamanese — Some  Andamanese  taken  prisoners  on Viper  Island — Further  attacks — Captain  Haiighton  decided  to  send . some  of  the  .Andamanese  prisoners  to  Burmah  for  a  time,  and  the
Till  CONTEXTS.
PAGE.
Government  of  India  approved — Colonel  Fytche's  remarks  on  the Andamanese  sent  to  Burniah — Malay  prows  seen  near  the  Archi- pelago Islands — Remaining  Andamanese  prisoners  released — Ac- count of  them — Further  attacks  by  the  Andunanese — The  Anda- manese returned  from  Moulmein — Extracts  from  the  journal  of  the Asiatic  Society  regarding1  tlie  Andamanese — Vocabulary — Colonel A.  Fytche's  notes  on  the  Andamanese — Major  Tickell's  notes  on  the Andamanese  under  his  charge  at  Moulmein,  and  vocabulary — Captain  Hanghton  examines  the  islands,  and  discovers  "  Kwang Tung  "  Harbour — Edible  birds'  nest  collectors'  reports — Major Haughton  proceeds  on  leave,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  R.  C.  Tytler becomes  Officiating  Superintendent  of  Port  Blair— Notes  on  the vocabularies  collected  by  Major  Haughton   290—358
CHAPTER  X.
Murder  of  Pratt  by  the  Andamanese — Colonel  Tytler  proposes  severe measures — Letter  from  the  Government  of  India — The  murderers of  Pratt  are  arrested — Wallace's  statement— The  Andamanese  be- come more  friendly,  and  are  allowed  to  see  the  captives — Truth about  the  murder  of  Pratt  disclosed — Colonel  Ty tier's  letters — Dis- pleasure o£  the  Government  of  India — Release  of  the  captives. Convicts  assisted  in  escaping  by  Malays — The  country  between Port  Blair  and  Port  Mouat  explored — Mr.  Corbyn  in  charge  of  the Andamanese— Colonel  Tytler  leaves  the  Settlement,  and  is  succeeded by  Major  Ford— Colonel  Tytler's  letter  to  the  Government— Colo- nel Tytler's  letter  to  Mr.  Corbyn— Narrative  of  Mr.  Corbyn— Rupees  100  per  mensem  allowed  by  the  Government  for  the Andaman  Homes    359—403
CHAPTER  XI.
Narrative  No.  2,  by  Mr.  Corbyn,  with  notes— Hi?  expeditions  into  the interior  with  the  Andamanese,  and  his  gradual  taming  of  them — Naval  Brigadesmen  in  trouble  at  Chiriya  Tapu— Children  taught— Habits  of  the  Andamanese— Stories  of  Andamanese  kidnapped,  etc—
,      Sir  Robert  Napier's  visit  to  the  Andamans  404—447
CONTENTS.  ix
PAGE. CHAPTER  XII.
Narrative  No.  3,  by  Mr.  Corbyn — Visit  to  Calcutta  of  the  Anda- manese — Visits  to  Rangoon,  and  Moulmein  of  the  Andamanese — 1  rouble  with  the  South  tribe — Homes  onRoss  Island — Restrictions- Escape  of  Andamanese  from  the  Homes — Death  of  Topsy — Attempt to  utilise  the  Andamane.sc  in  the  capture  of  runaway  convicts — Letter  from  Mr.  Corbyn — Letter  from  Major  Ford — Trouble  in  the Homes — Grant  of  R200  per  mensem  to  the  Andaman  Homes— Port Blair  placed  under  the  orders  of  the  Government  of  Burmah — Enquiry  by  the  Government  about  the  Andamanese — More  trouble in  the  Homes — Murder  of  a  convict  by  the  Andamanese  at  the  North Outpost — Homes  closed — Major  Ford's  opinion  of  Mr.  Corbyn's treatment  of  the  Andamanese— Mr.  Corbyn  resigns  the  charge  of the  Andamanese— Arrangement  of  the  Homes — Review  of  Mr. Corbyn's  management  of  the  Andamanese  .....  448— 481
CHAPTER  XIII
Mr.  Homfray  takes  charge  of  the  Andamanese  -They  behave  better — Friendly  relations  with  them  resumed — Many  Andamanese  in  the Home — Mr.  Homfray  makes  them  work— His  treatment  of  them — Relations  extended  to  more  distant  septs — Annual  Report  for  1H64-65 —  Report  by  the  Government  of  Burmah  on  the  Andamanese — Mala  Biala's  acquaintance  made — Jacko's  death  and  burial— Mr. Homfray's  notes  on  the  customs  of  the  Andamanese — Mr.  Homfray takes  Andamanese  to  Calcutta — Mr.  Homfray's  further  notes  on  the Andamanese — Men  from  the  Akar-Bdle  tribe  first  come  into  the Home — Jim  murders  Juinboo,  and  hides,  but  is  caught — The Andamanese  work  for  convicts— Annual  Report  for  1865-66  .  .  482 — 512
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
THE  ANDAMANESE.
CHAPTER  I.
Position  and  physical  geography  of  tho  Andaman  Islands — Their  geological  formation  
Dr.  Rink'a  remarks— Mr.  B.  D.  Oldham's  remarks — Notes  on  the  subsidence  of  tho Islands— Dr.  Prain's  remarks — 'Nai-condam — Barren  Island — Piracies,  and  kidnap- ping of  the  Andarnanese  for  slaves,  by  the  Malays — The  Harbours  of  the Andamans — The  climate  of  the  Andamans — Seasons— Andaman  Forests — Fauna — The  Andamanese — Theory  of  a  Negrito  popalation  in  a  now  submerged  tropical continent — Remnants  of  the  Negrito  race — Numbers  of  the  Andamanese  at  the  time of  oar  occupation  of  the  Islands  in  1858 — The  Kitchen- Mid  lens  in  the  Anda- mans— Legends  of  the  Andamanese  regarding  the  antiquity  of  the  race — Views  of the  Malays  about  the  Andamanese,  and  their  name  for  the  Islands  and  people — Identity  of  the  Andamanese  with  the  Hanuraans  of  the  Ramayana,
THE  Andaman  Islands  lie  in  the  Bay  of  Bengal,  between  the 10th  and  14th  Parallels  of  North  Latitude,  and  between  the  92nd and  94th  Meridians  of  East  Longitude .  The  Group  of  Islands  is divided  into  the  Great  and  Little  Andaman,  the  former  being  sub- divided into  the  North,  Middle,  and  South  Andaman,  with  the  out- lying Islands  of  Landfall,  Interview,  Rutland,  and  the  North  and South  Sentinel  ;  the  Archipelago,  and  Labyrinth  Groups.  Includ- ing all  the  small  Islets,  however,  there  are  201  Islands  in  the Andamans.
The  Great  Andaman,  from  Cape  Price,  the  North  end  of  the North  Andaman,  to  the  South  end  of  Rutland  Island,  is  155  miles  iu length,  and  nowhere  more  than  18  miles  in  breadth.  The  Little Andaman,  26|  miles  by  16,  lies  31  miles  south  of  Rutland  Island, the  entire  length  of  the  Group  being  219  miles.
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATION'S
V.ulaman    IsUnds    are   hilly,    rising    in   the   North \   daman  to  MOO  foot.  in  the  Middle  Andaman  to  1,678  feet,  and  in
l.MO  fort.     Numerous    creeks   intersect   the .id*.'  and    there    are    three     Straits,     Homfray,     Middle,    and which  are  navigable   for   vessels  of  less  than  twelve
miles  to  the  westward  of  the   South   Andaman  is  the
North  Swtinel  Island,  and  86    miles  south   of   that   is  the  South
About   70    miles    to    the  eastward  of  the  Andamans  lie  the nd  of  Nawondam,  opposite  the  North  Andaman,    and  Barren 1-Oand  oppwte  An  MMdle  Andaman.  These  belong  to  the  Andaman
Group.
Gtaalajmia  ait  of  opinion  that  the  Andamans  are  a  continuation (I  tl*  Arn**n  Yonah.  Tke  oHer  rooks  are  probably  oldest  Tertiarv w  Hte  C^b^etws,  ttwufk  th<ar  eract  age  cannot  be  told  on  account A!  tk«  absent*  of  fossils.  These  rocks  appear  again  in  precisely  the «M»  fHM  » t»»  Xias  IsbAis  o»  the  west  coast  of  Sumatra.
IV  n*w«r,  or  AnAipdago    rooks,  oonfcain   RadioUriam    and FmWMfen,  a»d  aw  upper  Ttftiaiy.    These  rocks  occur  again  in tft*  KMten,  a»4  intfc*  wain  body  of  the  ishvad  of  Suoamtaa. Seauael  rhadh  an  also  of  Ak  farmatioa,  with  a
rock  in  the  TsHiiiK  and
•     -
k  a  food  **1  of
of  the  stnua  indmtes
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
may  be  seen  at  Port  Campbell,  on  the  West  coast  of  the  South  Anda- man, and  at  Redskin  Island  in  the  Labyrinth  Group,  he  states  : —
"  Some  spheroidal  masses  seen  sticking  out  of  the  cliffs,  or  regu- larly arranged  in  lines,  are  remarkable.  They  consist  of  a  much  harder substance  than  the  greater  part  of  the  sandstone.  This  imbedded and  more  solid  sandstone  is  identical  in  composition  with  the  main mass,  differing  only  by  the  calcareous  cement  being  present  in  a larger  quantity.  This  forms  in  some  places  round  masses  four  feet  in diameter,  and  because  they  resist  decomposition  longer,  they  protrude in  the  most  varied  forms  out  of  the  cliffs,  and  are  strewed  over  the shore  indicating  the  former  place  of  the  rook.
"  One  might,  at  first  sight,  suppose  that  these  imbedded  masses are,  on  account  of  their  rounded  form,  pebbles  of  a  foreign  rock,  but their  composition  shows  that  they  have  a  similar  origin  with  the  rest of  the  sandstone,  the  only  difference  being  that  the  calcareous  matter, which  pervades  the  whole  mass,  has  been  concentrated  at  certain points.  The  rounded  form,  moreover,  could  not  be  due  to  rolling about,  for  the  concentrically  laminar  structure  clearly  shows  that their  exterior  form  is  connected  with  their  internal  arrangement."
O
Mr.  E.  D.  Oldham  states  in  "  Notes  on  the  Geology  of  the Andaman  Islands  "  : —
"  I  can  only  distinguish  with  certainty  two  sedimentary  forma- tions in  the  Andaman  Islands,  which  I  propose  to  call  the  Port Blair,  and  Archipelago  series,  respectively.
"  The  Port  Blair  series  consists  principally  of  firm  grey  sandstone and  inter-bedded  slaty  shales,  not  unfrequently  containing  nests  of coaly  matter,  and,  occasionally,  beds  of  conglomerate  and  pale  grey limestone  as  subsidiary  members.  The  sandstone  is  the  characteristic rock  of  the  series,  it  is  generally,  if  not  always,  non-calcareous,  and  is easily  recognised,  where  exposed  between  tidemarks,  by  its  peculiar mode  of  weathering  :  owing  to  irregular  distribution  of  the  cement- ing material,  bosses  of  harder  stone  are  left  standing  up  above  the general  level  of  the  rock,  and  these  bosses  are  invariably  irregularly honey -combed  by  the  solvent  action  of  the  sea  water.
4  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  UKLATIONS
«'  In  several  places  1  found  red  and  green  jaspery  beds  very  similar to  \vhat  occur  in  Manipur  and  Burma,  but  I  was  unable  to  determine whether  any  of  those  belonged  to  an  older  series  or  not.  In  part  at  least, they  seem  to  belong  to  the  same  series  as  the  sandstones  and  shales,  in the  midst  of  which  they  may  be  found  cropping  out,  but  it  is  by  no means  impossible  that  some  of  thorn  belong  to  an  older  series,  for, on  the  east  coast  of  the  South  Andaman,  close  to  the  boundaries of  the  serpentine,  south  of  Shoal  Bay,  I  found  great  banks  of  con- glomerate containing  pebbles  of  similar  jaspery  rock  ;  it  is  of  course possible  that  this  conglomerate  is  newer  than  the  sandstone,  but  the fact  that,  though  found  close  to  the  sarpentine  it  contains  no  pebbles of  that  rock->  indicates  that  it  is  probably  of  earlier  date  than  the serpentine  intrusions,  and  consequently  probably  of  the  same  age  as the  Port  Blair  series.
"  On  Entry  Island,  and  again  in  a  small  bay,  not  marked  on  the Marine  chart,  immediately  south  of  Tort  Meadows,  I  found  beds  of volcanic  origin.  In  the  middle  of  the  small  bay  just  mentioned,  a square  rock  composed  of  a  breccia  of  pale  greea  felsite,  cemented  by  a matrix  of  felsitic  ash,  stands  out  of  the  water,  and  on  Entry  Island, among  a  series  of  rocks  indurated  and  contorted  so  as  to  baffle  des- cription, there  are  some  beds  full  of  angular  fragments,  and apparently  of  volcanic  origin.  The  age  of  these  it  is  dillicult  to determine  ;  they  seem  to  pass  northwards  into  beds  among  which jaspery  slate  and  limestone  are  to  be  found,  and  at  the  northern extremity  of  the  island  there  is  some  intrusive  serpentine,  but  at  the southern  end  of  the  island  ne  ir  the  top  of  the  section,  if  I  read  it aright,  I  found  iu  a  bed  of  sandstone  an  isolated  boulder,  about  a  foot long,  of  a  serpentinous  rock,  evidently  derived  from  the  serpentine intrusion.  On  the  whole,  it  is  probable  that  these  are  of  later  date than  the  Port  Blair  sandstones.
"  The  newer  series,  which  I  have  called  the  Archipelago  series,  as the  whole  of  the  islands  of  the  Archipelago  are  formed  by  it,  consists typically  of  soft  limestones  formed  of  coral  and  shell  sand,  soft  calf oareous  sandstones  and  soft  white  clays,  with  occasionally  a  band  of
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
conglomerate,  the  pebbles  of  which  soem  originally  to  have  been  coral, though  no  structure  is  now  discernible.  These  bods  seem  to  cover  a large  aroa  in  the  Andamans."
With  regard  to  the  Cinque  Islands,  the  formation  of  which resembles  that  of  Rutland  Island,  the  South-oast  coast  of  the  South Andaman,  and  part  of  tho  East  coast  of  the  Middle  Andaman,  he states  .- — •
"  The  Cinque  Islands  consist  principally  of  intrusive  rock  of  the serpentine  series,  but  there  are  also  some  metamorphosed  and indurated  sedimentary  beds  ;  of  thesa,  some  are  siliceous,  but  for  the most  part  they  are  calcareous,  the  most  remarkable  form  being  a green  chloritic  olcite  or  serpentinous  matrix  with  numerous  granules of  crystalline  calcite  scattered  through  it ;  tho  rounded  outlines  of these  grcinules  seem  to  be  due  to  attrition,  and  the  crystalline  struc- ture to  subsequent  motamorphism,  These  rocks  did  not  seem  to  me  to belong  to  the  Port  Bl-iir,  but  to  the  Archipelago  series,  and  at  the first  blush  it  would  seem  as  if  they  had  been  metamorphosed  by  the intrusion  of  tha  soi'pantine  ;  fortunately,  however,  at  one  or  two places,  and  more  specially  on  the  eastern  face  of  the  southern  island, close  to  its  northern  end,  there  are  exposures  of  a  conglomeratic  bed, in  which  the  pebbles  are  of  serpentine,  and  the  matrix  is  fine-grained and  very  serpentinous.  This  conglomerate,  both  from  its  position  and induration,  belongs  to  the  same  series  as  the  other  sedimentary rocks  of  the  island,  and  proves  that  they  are  of  later  date  than  the serpentine  intrusion,  and  that  in  all  probability  their  metamorphism is  due  to  the  contortion  they  have  locally  undergone.  The  conglomer- ate just  mentioned  is  a  curious  bed,  not  of  the  type  commonly  known as  conglomerate,  but  exhibits  that  structure,  usually  considered  due to  the  action  of  floating  ice,  which  is  seen  in  the  boulder  bed  of  the Talchirs,  or  the  Blaini  conglomerate  of  the  Himalayas.  The  matrix is,  or  rather  was,  originally,  a  fine  mud  or  clay,  and  through  it  the pebbles  are  scattered,  not  touching  each  other,  but  each  isolated  in the  matrix.
"  As  regards  the  intrusive  rocks   of   the  Andamans,  I  have   little
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
to  say  ;  they  are  similar  to  those  of  Manipur  and  Burma  to  the north,  and  of  the  Nicobars  to  the  south,  and,  as  far  as  I  could  judge from  the  manner  of  their  occurrence,  of  certainly  later  date  than  the Port  Blair  series,  the  only  section  which  seems  to  throw  any  doubt on  this  conclusion  being  the  sandstones  on  Craggy  Island.  I  have followed  my  predecessors  in  calling  these  rocks  serpentine,  that  being the  most  prominent  or  remarkable  form  which  they  take,  but  they not  unfrequently  pass  into  crystalline  diorite  or  gabbro.
"  In  tracing  the  Andaman  rocks  northwards  to  Burma,  we  have little  difficulty  in  identifying  the  Port  Blair  series  with  the  Negrais rocks  of  Theobald.  Not  only  do  they  resemble  each  other  in  the petrographical  features  and  relative  proportions  of  their  individual members,  but  the  peculiar  mode  of  weathering,  where  exposed  be- tween tidemarks,  which  I  have  remarked  in  the  former,  is  matched by  the  sandstones  of  the  Negrais  Group,  which  have  been  described as  usually  presenting,  when  seen  on  the  sea  beach,  a  '  honey-combed or  cancellated  appearance,  the  result  of  a  peculiar  mode  of weathering.'
"  Unfortunately,  the  age  of  the  Negrais  rocks  cannot  be  deter- mined with  accuracy,  but  they  are  believed  to  underlie  and  be associated  with  some  beds  of  known  nummulitic  age,  so  that  we  may class  the  Port  Blair  rocks  as  Eocene  or  slightly  older.
"  Thus,  whatever  line  we  follow,  we  are  brought  up  to  the  same conclusion,  tit.,  that  the  Port  Blair  series  is  probably  of  early tertiary,  or  possibly  late  cretaceous  age,  and  by  tracing  them  south- wards, we  find  that  the  rocks  of  the  Archipelago  series  are  probably of  Miocene  age  or  even  newer,
"  Since  the  publication  of  Kurz's  Report  en  the  vegetation  of the  Andamans,  it  has  been  an  accepted  fact  that  the  Andaman  Islands are,  and  have  been,  during  recent  times,  undergoing  subsidence.  It was  difficult  to  conceive  how  this  could  be  the  case,  for  the  Arracan coast  to  the  north  and  the  Nicobar  Islands  to  the  south,  between which  the  Andamans  form  the  connecting  link,  are  both  fringed  by raised  beaches  which  show  that  they  have  recently  been  elevated,  but
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESR.
the  observations  recorded  by   Mr.  Kurz    were  so  unanswerable    that they   were   allowed   to   override   the   argument   from  analogy.     Mr. Kurz's  conclusions  were  based  principally  on  the  fact  that  he  found the  stumps  of  trees,  belonging   to  species   which   only   grow   above high-water  mark  and  beyond    the    reach    of  salt    water,  in   the mangrove  swamps   and  on   the   sea   shore,   while,     as   corroborative evidence,   he   adduces   the   facts  that,  according  to  the  Report  of  the Andaman   Committee,   the  sea   had   encroached   some  40   or  50  feet since  the  first  settlement  on  Chatham  Island,    Port  Cornwallis  ;   and that  '  Lieutenant  Jameson  of  Chatham  Island  has  informed  mo  that  a similar  encroachment   of   the   sea   is  taking    place  at  that  island  in Port  Blair.'     As  regards  the  latter  point,  there  is  no  evidence  that  the '  encroachment'  of  the  sea  at  Port  Cornwallis  was   due  to  subsidence, and,  as  far  as  can  be  judged   by   the   lithograph  in  the  Report  of  the Andaman  Committee,  and  the  wood-cut  in  Dr.    Mouat's   book,   both taken  from  a  photograph,     I  should  be   inclined   to  look  upon  it  as  a case  of  encroachment  by  erosion  of  the  sea   shore  and  not  by  sub- sidence.    The  evidence  of  the  trees  is,  however,   almost  conclusive, for  the  only  explanation  possible,   apart  from  an  outward  set  of  the soil  towards  the  sea,   such  as  is  known  to  take  place  under  certain circumstances,  is  that  the  land  is  sinking,   and  I  can   myself  produce an  observation  which  supports  this   conclusion,     The  large    bay  on the  north-east  coast  of  Havelock  Island  is  for  the  most  part  fringed with  low-lying  land,   next    to   the  beach  this  rises  some  4  or  5  feet above  high-water  mark,   but  in   many  places  behind  this  it  sinks  to form  a  hollow,  and  then  rises  again  to  the  same  level  as  the  outer ridge,  or  rather  higher.    The  whole  of   this  low  land  is  covered  with forest,  but,  wherever  there  is  one  of  the  hollows  just  mentioned,  there the  forest  trees  are  all  dead,   and  the  soil  is  often  moist  with  salt water  ;     the  soil  of  these  low-lying  patches  must  have  once  been dry,  like  that  where  the  forest  is  still  growing,  and  the  uniformity  in size  of  the  dead  and  the   living    trees  shows  that    in   all   probability several  generations  have  lived  and  died  on  rise   and    in   hollow  alike, until,  as  the  land  gradually  subsided,  the  sea  water  rose  in  the  soil  of the  hollows  and  the  trees  succumbed  to  its  fatal  influence.
g  A  HISTORY  OP  ODK  RELATIONS
"  "We  may,  therefore,  take  it  as  proved  that  the  Andainans  are  at the  present  day  gradually  sinking,  but  there  is  ample  evidence  in  the raised  beaches  that  fringe  the  shores  of  the  Andainans,  that  in  the immediate  past  elevation  has  exceeded  subsidence.
"  There  is  not  wanting  evidence  that  the  depression  of  the Island^,  which  is  going  on  at  the  present  time,  has  but  recently  com- menced, for  the  Kitchen-Middens  of  the  Andamanese  are  in  positions where  a  very  slight  subsidence  would  submerge  them,  and  the  time that  they  represent  may  be  understood  by  the  section  of  one  which  I examined  near  Port  Mouat  ;  it  was  twelve  feet  in  thickness  in  the centre,  and  in  this  there  was  a  bed  one  foot  six  inches  thick  of vegetable  mould,  with  shells  scattered  through  it,  marking  a  period when  generations  of  shrubs  and  plants  must  have  lived  and  died while  the  Midden  was  abandoned,  or  only  occasionally  visited.  This was  doubtless  started  on  a  rock  rising  among  the  mangroves,  and gradually  extended  on  to  the  mud  ;  and  it  is  a  noteworthy  fact  that the  surface  of  the  mud  under  the  shells  does  not  appreciably  differ from  the  general  level  of  the  mud  outside.  It  shows  that  at  a  time when  probably  not  one-sixteenth  of  the  present  bulk  of  the  Midden had  accumulated,  the  level  of  the  mangrove  swamps  was  very  nearly what  it  is  now.  Had  the  soil  surrounding  the  rock  on  which  the  Mid- den was  started  been  well  clear  of  the  influence  of  the  tides,  it  would certainly  not  have  supported  a  growth  of  mangrove,  and,  so  far  as  my experience  has  shown  me,  would  consequently  have  been  of  a  very different  character  to  what  is  actually  found,  while,  had  the  surface  of the  mangrove  swamp  stood  much  lower  than  what  it  now  is,  the  mud would  certainly  have  risen  above  what  is  the  base  of  the  Kitcheu- Midden  in  its  earlier  stages  ;  in  other  words,  the  surface  of  the  mangrove swamp  was  then  very  nearly  at  the  highest  level  it  could  reach,  and as  this  was  limited  by  the  height  to  wlich  the  tides  rise,  it  shows  that during  the  time  represented  by  the  formation  of  this  Midden — a  period which  must  be  measured  by  centuries,  if  not  by  tens  of  centuries — the land  has  not  appreciably  altered  its  level  relatively  to  the  sea."
Additional  evidence  of  the  present   subsidence   of   the  Andaman-
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  ,j
Islands  can  be  obtained  :  at  Ranguohang,  on  the  east  coast  of  the South  Andaman,  about  seven  miles  south  of  Port  Blair,  where  the land  inside  the  sea  beach,  to  the  south  of  the  mouth  of  the  creek  is slowly  sinking,  and  forest  trees  are  dying  from  the  advent  of  the  sea water  and  giving  place  to  mingroves  ;  at  the  North  end  of  the  Little Andaman,  where  the  foreshore  is  strewn  with  dead  tree  trunks  with no  trice  of  the  soil  in  which  their  roots  formerly  stood  ;  at  the  North end  of  the  North  Sentinel  Island  ;  and  at  the  North  end  of  the North  Andaman,  where  it  is  very  marked.  The  subsidence  appears to  be  greater  on  the  east  coast  than  on  the  west.
It  is  au  interesting  fact  that  the  soundings  recorded  a  hundred years  ago  by  Lieutenant  Blair's  survey  of  the  Middle  Straits,  Port Cornwallis,,  and  Port  Meadows,  remain  the  same  at  the  present  day.
A  remarkable  feature  of  the  Andaman  Group  are  the  out- lying Islands  of  Narcondam  and  Barren  Island.
Of  these  Dr.  Prain  states  : —
"  These  volcanic  peaks  are  a  continuation  northwards  of  the Sunda  range  of  volcanoes  ;  and  the  Sunda  range  itself  is  but  a  sec- tion of  the  vobanic  system  that  extends  from  the  Andes,  through  the Rocky  Mountains,  the  Aleutian  and  Kurile  Islands,  Khamschatka, Japan,  the  Philippines,  Flores,  Sumbawa,  Java  and  Sumatra,  to  these very  spots,  and  beyond  them  to  the  isolated  extinct  volcanoes  in Burma  about  Pagan.
"  "Whenever  a  continental  area  (and  such  an  area  includes  not merely  part  of  a  continent,  but  any  adjacent  islands  with  shallow soundings)  rises  out  of  the  deep  sea,  you  find  (n  >t  on  the  edge,  hut immediately  behind  it,  on  the  continental  side  that  is)  a  line  of volcanoes,  due,  doubtless,  to  the  wrenching  and  dislocation  of  the earth's  crust  at  the  sharp  hend  that  must  accompany  the  shearing. Sometimes,  as  in  America,  you  do  not  flnd  a  sea  behind  the  ridge that  marks  the  edge  of  the  continental  area,  but  oftener,  as  in  the Kurile  Sea,  the  Sea  of  Japan,  and  the  Andaman  Sea,  you  do  find such  a  sea  ;  the  only  thing  about  the  Andaman  one  is  that  the ridge  has  not  shoved  itself  so  far  up  as  in  the  case  of  Japan  or  Java and  so  we  find  that  the  edge  is  sub-serial,  but  the  place  behind  it
10  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
where  the  volcanoes  spout  up,  is  submarine,  and  therefore  only  the cones  of  the  volcanoes,  and  not  the  ridge  to  Avhich  they  belong,  has got  above  the  surface.
"  But  while  Narcondam  and  Barren  Island  belong  to  the  same system  as  the  Sumatra  volcanoes,  they  almost  certainly  never  were connected  originally  with  Sumatra.  The  sea  is  too  deep  for  any such  thing  to  have  been  possible.  It  is  a  recognised  truth  that  there is  no  evidence  for,  but  every  reason  for  deciding  against  the  idea  that auy  land  (other  than  an  isolated  volcanic  peak)  has  ever  risen  or sunk  more  than  200  fathoms.  Very  likely  100  is  more  of  a  just estimate,  and  even  that  can  have  been  but  rare."
Dr.   Prain  also  adds,  in  another  letter  :—
"  Narcondam  is  one  of  the  Pegu  Group  of  volcanoes,  and  Barren Island  is  one  of  the  Sunda  Group.  These  two  thus  give  us  the  loca- lity where  the  two  groups  approach  most  closely.  They  may  be Bub-dbisions  of  the  same  Group."
Narcondam  Island  is  a  lofty  peak  rising  2,330  feet  above  the  sea from  out  of  deep  water.  It  is  2^  miles  long  by  1^  mile  wide,  is  un- inhabited, and  has  never  been  visited  by  the  Audamanese.  The  name is  probably  of  Malay,  and  not  of  direct  Sanskrit  origin,  as  has  been often  supposed.
The  supposed  Sanskrit  derivation,  "  Narak-kund,"  would  give the  meaning  of  the  name  to  be  "  Pit  of  Hell,"  which,  having  been accepted,  caused  much  confusion,  owing  to  the  difficulty  of  reconciling it  with  Narcondam  which  is  merely  an  upheaved  peak  of  volcanic origin,  when  it  is  obviously  more  applicable  to  Barren  Island,  a  former active  volcano.
Barren  Island  is  a  now  quiescent  volcano  rising  from  deep  water to  a  height  of  1,150  feet  above  the  sea.  It  is  circular  in  form,  with  a diameter  of  about  two  miles.
It  was  last  seen  in  a  state  of  active  eruption  in  1803,  and  the crater  is  now  choked  and  cold.  A  thin  column  of  steam  issues  from a  pulphur  bed  on  the  side  of  the  cone,  near  the  top,  and  a  hot  spring at  the  base  gives  an  average  temperature  of  107°  Fahrenheit.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
When  in  eruption  the  flames  could  have  beau  seen  from  Outratn and  Lawrence  Islands  in  the  Andaman  Archipelago,  and  on  a  very clear  day  the  Island  is  visible  from  the  top  of  Mount  Harriet  in  the South  Andaman.  Some  have  suggested  that  the  Andaraanese,  who are  unable  to  make  fire,  procured  their  fire  from  this  volcano,  but  I do  not  consider  this  to  be  likely  as  they  would  be  much  afraid  of  the volcano,  would  not  venture  so  far  to  sea  in  any  case,  and  would  cer- tainly not  approach  an  island  they  dreaded.  They  distinctly  state that  they  have  never  in  any  former  period  visited  the  island,  and there  is  no  mention  of  it  in  any  of  their  legends.  So  important  an object  as  an  active  volcano  would  scarcely  have  been  omitted  had they  ever  visited  it.
A  s  the  physical  features  of  the  Andaman  Islanlshavea  con- siderable bearing  on  the  habits  of  the  Andamanese,  and  the  conduct of  our  policy  towards  them,  I  will  endeavour  to  describe  them  in  so far  as  is  relevant.
Of  the  shores  one  might  say,  in  general  terms  ;  steep-to,  with deep  water,  on  the  east  coast ;  shallow  water  and  fringing  reef  on the  west  coast.
On  either  coast  a  heavy  surf  beats,  according  to  which  monsoon may  be  blowing,  and  landing  would  be  difficult  were  it  not  for  the numerous  straits  aud  ore  ;ks,  and  the  excellent  harbours.
These  latter  are  so  important  a  feature  of  the  Andaman  Group that  I  will  enumerate  them  at  some  length.
They  were  formerly,  no  doubt,  for  ordinary  vessels,  the  only attraction  in  these  islands,  for  shelter  in  bad  weather  could  be obtained,  and  supplies  of  wood  and  water  could  be  procured.  There could  have  been  no  trading  with  the  aborigines,  and  there  are  no mineral  or  other  valuables  to  be  obtained.
The  Andamans  were  undoubtedly,  however,  a  head-quarters  for Malay  pirates,  the  many  well-sheltered  harbours,  with  big  creeks running  off  them  for  miles  inland,  affording  hiding  places  and  shelter at  all  times  of  the  year.  Sharks'  fins,  edible  birds'  nests,  and  trepang could  have  been  collected,  if  indeed  there  was  then  a  trade  in  these articles,  also  tortoise-shell.
c2
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
But  of  more  importance  to  the  Malays  was  the  central  posi- tion of  the  Islands,  so  far  handier  for  molesting  the  trade  of  the  Bay of  Bengal  than  the  Malay  Peninsula  ;  also,  which  has  been  ascer- tained beyond  doubt,  the  considerable  trade  which  was  done  in Andamanese  slaves.  Many  of  these  were  supplied  to  the  Raja  of Kedab,  part  of  whose  tribute  to  the  King  of  Siam  consisted  of  these slaves,  who  up  to  so  late  as  1860  are  known  to  have  been  at  the Siamese  Court.
The  Harbours  in  the  Andaman  Islands  are  :—
On  the  East  coast—
NORTH  ANDAMAN.—  Cadell  Bay;  affording  shelter  in  the south-west  monsoon  only.
The  Table  Island  Group  ;  also  affording  shelter  in  the  south-west monsoon  only.
Port  Cornwallis  ;  a  magnificent  harbour,    completely   sheltered in  all  weathers.
Stewart's  Sound  ;  a  fine  harbour  in  which  complete  shelter  can always  be  obtained.
(A  boat  passage  from  here  to  Interview  Island,  called  Austen Strait,  exists.)
MIDDLE  ANDAMAN.  —  There  is  shelter  in  both  monsoons to  be  obtained  inside  the  south  end  of  Long  Island.
Homfray  Strait  and  Middle  Strait  both  afford  shelter  for vessels  of  light  draught,  and  excellent  passages  to  the  West  coast with  many  hiding  places.
(These  parts  are  known  to  have  been  favourite  lurking  places  of the  Malays.)
SOUTH  ANDAMAN.—  Port  Meadows  ;  a  very  good,  well-shel^ tered  harbour.
Kyd  Island,  with  the  large,  many-branched  creek  running  to the  southward,  affords  a  shelter  for  small  vessels,  and  a  convenient mode  of  access  to  the  interior  of  the  South  Andaman.
Port  Blair;  a  well  known  and  magnificent  harbour.
WITH  THE  ANDAMAVESE.
MacPherson's  Strait,  which  is  both  a  harbour  and  shelter  at  all times  of  the  year  ;  and  a  convenient  passage  to  the  West  coast.
RUTLAND  ISLAND.— Portman  Harbour  affords  a  shelter  in the  south-west  monsoon  only.
On  the  West  coast —
NORTH  ANDAMAN.— Shelter  can  be  obtained  in  both monsoons  between  Paget  Island  and  the  mainland.
The  long  and  completely  sheltered  stretch  of  water  between Interview  Island  and  the  mainland  affords  both  harbour  and  hid- ing places.
MIDDLE  ANDAMAN.— Kwangtung  Harbour,  at  the  western mouth  of  Middle  and  Homfray  Straits,  is  well  sheltered  and  capa- cious. It  is  most  convenient  as  a  head-quarters  for  traffic,  etc., through  these  Straits.
SOUTH  ANDAMAN.— Port  Campbell  is  a  good  and  capacious harbour,  bat  with  an  intricate  and  dangerous  entrance.
The  Labyrinth  Islands  afford  numbers  of  well-sheltered  anchor- ages and  hiding  places.
IN  THE  ARCHIPELAGO  ISLANDS.— On  the  eastern  coast shelter  can  be  obtained  in  Chdrka-Juru,  Kwangtung  Strait,  and Tddma-Juru.
AT  THE  LITTLE  ANDAMAN.— With  the  exception  of  Hut Bay  on  the  East  coast,  which  affords  a  certain  amount  of  shelter  in the  south-west  monsoon,  there  are  no  harbours  ;  yet  it  is  worthy  of notice  that,  in  this  island,  there  are  more  traces  of  Malay  or  other foreign  influence  among  the  aborigines,  than  in  the  others.
Few  groups  of  islands  can  show,  within  such  a  small  area,  a similar  number  of  really  fine  harbours.
The  climate  of  the  Andamans  is  equable,  the  mean  average temperature  being  84°  Fahrenheit,  and  the  average  diurnal  variation 10°  Fahrenheit.
The  yearly  average  rainfall  is  over  100  inches,  and  it  rains  on half  the  whole  number  of  days  in  the  year,
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
Nervous  depression  and  dyspepsia,  malarious,  bronchial  and lung  complaints,  and  rheumatism,  are  the  most  common  diseases among  the  Aborigines  as  resultants  of  the  climate.
The  Seasons  are  —
The  South-west  Monsoon,  and  rainy  season,  lasting  from  about  the 20th  of  April  to  the  20th  of  October.  Breaks  of  calm,  fine  weather occur  during  this  season,  and  usually  at  the  close  of  it  a  long  break often  of  three  weeks  in  duration  occurs,  when  the  sea  is  glassy  calm
After  the  20th  of  October  variable  winds  and  heavy  gales  (often cyclones),  usher  in  the  North-east  Monsoon,  which  may  commence by  the  10th  of  November.
Sometimes  the  months  of  November  and  December  are  dry  with high  winds,  but  more  generally  a  good  deal  of  rain  accompanies  the North-east  wind  in  these  months,  and  heavy  South-east  gales  have been  experienced  in  the  first  week  of  December  and  even  later.
After  the  1st  of  January  the  rain  almost  ceases,  the  force  of  the Monsoon  declines,  and  until  the  middle  of  April  there  are  light  winds, fine  weather,  and  a  fairly  calm  sea.
The  whole  of  the  Islands  are  covered  with  an  extremely  dense jungle,  reaching  to  the  sea-shore,  and,  owing  to  the  thick  under- growth of  canes,  etc.,  it  is  in  places  impassable  even  to  the  Aborigines. Only  on  the  North  Sentinel  and  Brothers  Islands  is  the  jungle  at  all open  and  free  from  undergrowth.
Mangrove  swamps  are  of  course  common  and  extensive.
The  trees  are  lofty,  and  often  covered  with  gigantic  climbing plants,  which  hang  from  the  summits  in  festoons.  The  typical  tree is  Dipterocarpus  Isevis,  and  the  principal  trees  of  which  use  is  made by  the  Andamanese  are  the  Mangrove,  Padouk,  Melochia  velu- tina,  some  of  the  Sterculiaceae,  Bombax  insigne,  Areca  laxa,  Pan- danus,  Bambusa,  Anadendron  paniculatum,  with  some  others.
Fruits  are  gathered  from  many  of  the  forest  trees,  and  others  have medicinal  virtues  assigned  by  the  Andamanese  to  their  leaves.
There  are  six  species  of  edible  roots,  or  yams,  and  many  palms.
No     coconuts    exist,     the     reason    probably    being     that     the
WITH  THE  ANDAMUNESE.  15
Andamanese  eat  up  the  majority  wh.ch  are  washed  on  the  shore, and  the  jungle  pigs  account  for  the  remainder,  rooting  up  and  eat- ing the  sprouting  nuts.
Only  those  who  know  the  Anrlamanese  can  appreciate  how closely  they  scan  the  shore  in  search  of  food,  and  how  little  likely  it  is that  such  a  prize  as  a  coconut  would  escape  their  eyes  Moreover, when  the  Islands  were  thickly  peopled,  before  our  advent,  and  each tribe  had  to  keep  to  its  own  country,  not  a  yard  of  the  entire  coast- line hut  was  explored  weekly  by  parties  in  search  of  food.
Much  of  the  scenery  of  the  Andaman  Islands  is  of  great  beauty, but  this  does  not  in  the  least,  appeal  to  the  eye  of  the  Aboriginal.
The  sea  round  the  Islands  swarms  with  fish  and  turtle,  quantities of  shell-fish,  including  the  huge  Tridacna,  are  to  be  found  on  the reefs,  and  at  no  time  could  an  absolute  scarcity  of  food  have  been experienced.
In  the  interior,  while  there  are  no  big  game,  or  any  dangerous beasts  of  prey,  there  are  numbers  of  a  small  variety  of  pig,  the  jungle cat  (Paradoxurus  andamanensis),  and  flying  foxes;  fish  and prawns  in  the  fresh-water  streams ;  the  big  water  lizard,  honey, fruits,  roots,  seeds,  and  last,  but  by  no  means  least  in  the  estimation of  the  Audamanese,  grubs,  give  a  full  and  varied  dietary.
"We  have  now  to  consider  the  Andamanese  themselves.
It  has  been  shown  that,  at  some  remote  period,  the  Andaman Islands  were  joined  to  Cape  Negrais,  through  the  present  Preparis and  Coco  Islands,  and  were  thus  part  of  the  mainland  of  Asia.
A  Negrito  race  then  existed  over  an  enormous  extent  of  country, remnants  being  now  found  pure  in  the  Andamans,  and  until  recently in  the  now  extinct  Tasmanians ;  nearly  pure  in  the  Ae'tas  of  the Philippines,  which  islands  were  probably  at  that  time  attached  to  the same  mainland  as  the  Andamans  ;  and  in  the  Semangs  of  the  Malay Peninsula ;  and  there  are  traces  of  Negrito  blood  in  some  of  the Kolarian  races  of  India.  It  is  a  question  for  consideration  whether the  Bushmen,  the  dwarf  tribes  in  the  Congo  Forest,  and  other Negrito- African  tribes,  are  not  part  of  the  same  race,  the  very  wide
A  HISTORY  OP  ODR  GELATIONS
distribution  of  which,  in  hitherto  unsuspected  parts,  is  now  being recognised.
Customs  similar  to  those  of  the  Andamanese  are  to  be  found among  the  people  on  the  islands  on  the  west  of  Torres  Straits,  and possibly  the  Papuans  and  other  Melanesian  races  are  Negritos  crossed with  the  Malayan  or  Polynesian  type.
This  Negrito  race  has  been  exterminated  elsewhere  by  higher types,  hut  before  this  extermination  took  place  land  communication with  Arracaa  was  cut  off  by  subsidence  and  the  Andamans  became islands.  Since  this  occurrence  the  Audamanese  aborigines have  remained,  as  we  found  them  on  our  occupation  of  the islands  in  1858,  a  people  to  themselves,  cut  off  by  the  nature  of  the islands,  and  by  their  own  hostility  to  all  strangers,  from  outside influences,  and  preserving  their  persons  and  customs  as  the  last  pure remnant  of  one  of  the  oldest  races  existing.
The  date  of  the  separation  of  the  Andamans  from  the  mainland of  Burma  cannot  be  determined,  but  the  years  since  the  occurrence must  be  reckoned  by  thousands,  and  it  is  probable  that,  during  all those  years,  the  population  of  the  Andamans  remained  very  much as  it  is  at  present.
At  the  time  of  our  occupation  in  1858,  the  population  of  the Great  Andaman  might  be  estimated  roughly  at  6,000  souls,  and there  were  possibly  2,000  more  people  on  the  Little  Andaman. When  we  consider  that  some  Andamanese  have  no  children,  very few  have  more  than  three,  the  majority  of  the  children  die  in infancy,  and  the  grown-up  Andamanese  revenges  the  slightest  injury to  his  person  or  property,  or  even  a  fancied  insult,  by  a  murder,  and also  that  the  tribes  were  continually  at  feud  witli  each  other,  I think  we  may  accept  the  above  estimated  population  to  be  the average  for  many  centuries  past.
First  the  Kitchen-Middens  of  the  Andamanese,  and  then  their Legends,  to  which  less  importance  can  be  attached,  are  the  only  data we  have  on  which  to  calculate  the  numbers  and  antiquity  of  the race.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  17
As  regards  the  former.  A  Kitclion-Midden  is,  as  a  rule, not  more  than  fifty  feet  in  diameter  (though  there  are  some  excep- tions), and  on  this  a  Sept  of  not  more  than  thirty  persons  would  live. These  Middens  are  found  at  what  may  be  considered  the  head-quarters of  the  Tribe  or  Sept,  but  they  could  not  be  places  of  permanent  habita- tion for  the  following  reasons  : — The  changes  of  the  Monsoon,  the scarcity  of  food  (all  close  to  the  spot  being  gradually  eaten  up)  ; the  nomadic  disposition  of  the  Aborigines  ;  and  above  all,  the stench  arising  from  tlie  camp,  which  in  a  few  weeks  becomes  in- tolerable.
"We  must,  therefore,  allow  a  sufficient  number  of  Kitchen- Middens  for  the  necessary  changes  to  take  place,  and  there  are  not  a very  large  number  of  them  to  be  seen.  The  layers  of  soil  in  them show  that  they  were  occasionally  abandoned  for  many  years,  and  the same  Midden,  as  we  know  by  observation  of  the  present  habits  of the  Andamanese,  is  not  re-occupied  after  people  have  left  it  until  at least  three  months  have  elapsed  (indeed,  if  a  death  had  occurred  in  the village  on  it,  the  Andamanese  would  not  return  to  it  for  perhaps  a year)  ;  the  first  evidence  obtained  from  the  Middens  is,  therefore, that  the  Andamauese  were  never  very  numerous.
The  next  point  is,  that  the  principal  Middens  show  signs  of  great age,  the  shells  at  the  base  of  some  being  fossilised,  and  they  average twelve  to  fifteen  feet  in  height,  nor  are  there  many  new,  low  Midden.s, from  which  we  may  argue  that  no  great  increase  has  taken  place  in the  numbers  of  the  people.
The  third  point  which  an  examination  of  these  Middens  proves is,  that,  as  the  Andamanese  race  are  now,  so  they  were  ages  ago  when first  the  Middens  were  commenced.  Although  different  layers  of shells  in  the  Middens  show  us  where  the  diet  has  slightly  changed, certain  oysters,  for  example,  being  at  one  period  much  in  vogue  and at  another  time  entirely  avoided,  yet  even  among  the  fossilised  shells at  the  base  of  the  Middens  we  find  the  same  refuse,  and  the  same broken  bits  of  pottery,  as  we  find  strewn  on  the  surface  to-day.
We  will  now  consider  what  light  the  Legends  of  the  Andamanese
1 8  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
throw   on   their  origin.     Comparing   those   of   different   tribes,   and stripping  them  of  their  supernatural  additions,  we  arrive  at  this.
All  Andamanese  tradition  dates  back  to  some  great  cataclysm which  submerged  a  greater  part  of  the  land.  The  Andamanese  say that  before  this  cataclysm  they  were  all  one  tribe,  and  spoke  the same  language,  but  that  after  it  the  survivors  became  separated  into tribes,  their  languages  gradually  differed  until  at  last  they  became mutually  unintelligible  as  at  present,  and  they  point  to  certain  very ancient  Kitchen-Middens,  now  having  their  bases  on  the  sea  level,  as having  been  then  commenced  on  the  spots  to  which  the  survivors repaired.
They  say  that  before  the  cataclysm  the  places  where  these Middens  now  are  were  high  up  on  mountains,  and  that  no  one  would have  made  permanent  camps  there  then.
It  is  quite  possible  that  this  tradition  may  be  an  account  of  what occurred  when,  by  subsidence,  the  An  damans  were  cut  off  from  the mainland  of  Arracan,  and  though  geologists  are  slow  to  allow  of  sud- den convulsions,  yet  it  is  certain  that  the  subsidence,  whether  sudden or  gradual,  did  actually  take  place.  A  general  gradual  subsidence, ending  in  a  severe  earthquake  which  lowered  a  large  tract  of  land  a few  feet,  and  thus  submerged  a  considerable  area,  might  be  sufficient to  account  for  the  tradition.
It  is  curious  that,  though  there  are  no  wild  beasts  larger  than  a pig  at  the  Andamans  now  (excepting  reptiles  and  marine  mammals), the  Andamanese  state  that  large  and  fierce  beasts,  as  well  as  many aborigines,  were  drowned  in  the  cataclysm  ;  and,  even  in  the  Little Andaman  the  people  have  names  for  animals  which  they  cannot  des- cribe, but  evidently  have  traditions  of.
It  is  also  scarcely  probable  that,  with  Burma  and  the  Malay  Pe- ninsula so  full  of  big  game,  none  should  have  strayed  on  to  the  Anda- mans when  they  were  attached  to  the  mainland.
Whatever  value  we  may  attach  to  these  legends,  however,  one thing  seems  certain,  viz.,  that  the  Andamanese  have  inhabited  these islands  in  their  present  state  for  a  period  which  can  only  be  considered
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
by    thousands    of    years,  and  they  antedate  any  history  or  record preserved  among  other  peoples.
The  following  incident  will  show  how  the  Andamanese  "are  re- garded by  the  Malays,  who,  as  I  have  said,  knew  more  of  them  than any  other  persons  previous  to  our  occupation.
"When  visiting  Penang  in  1885  with  thirteen  Andamanese,  I  was mobbed  in  the  streets  by  the  Malays  who  called  to  their  friends  to come  and  see  the  "  Handumans."
Now  much  scientific  energy,  and  no  little  ingenuity,  has  been  ex- pended in  endeavouring  to  find  out  the  origin  of  the  word  "  Anda-
man."
"Andamanain"  (the   word   used   by    Marco   Polo),   being   con- sidered to  be  an  Arabic  (oblique)  Dual   signifying  "  The  Two   Anda-
mans."
Also     Ptolemy's     "  Insulge    Bonse    Fortunse  "    'AyafloG
was  suspected  of  having  been  converted  into  Agdaman, man,  and  ultimately  Andaman.     The  name  is,  however,  not  distinctly recorded  before  the  9th  century.
*The  Hon'ble  W.  E.  Maxwell,  a  well-known  Malay  scholar,  who happened  to  be  at  Penang  when  I  was  there  and  to  whom  I  men- tioned the  matter,  cut  the  Gordian  knot  at  once  by  saying  that  the Malays  had  known,  and  slaved  at, the  Andamans  from  time  immemorial ; that  they  looked  on  the  Andamanese,  (who  were  also  known  as  "  the Rakshasas  ")  as  the  Hanumans  mentioned  in  the  Rainayana,  and had  consequently  called  the  Group,  the  Islands  of  the  Hanumans  (or Handumans  as  they  pronounce  the  word),  hence  Andaman  Islands  as we  know  them.
The  history  of  the  Malays  amply  accounts  for  the  number  and variety  of  foreign  ingredients  in  their  language.  Hindus  appear  to have  settled  in  Sumatra,  and  Java  as  early  as  the  4th  century  of  our era,  and  to  have  continued  to  exercise  sway  over  the  native  popula- tions for  many  centuries.  These  received  from  them,  into  their  lan- guage a  large  number  of  Sanskrit  terms  from  which  we  can  infer  the nature  of  the  civilising  influence  imported  by  the  Hindu  rulers.
*  The  late  Sir  W.  Maxwell,  Governor  of  the  Gold  Coast.
20  A  HISTORY  OF  OCR  RELATIONS
This  Sanskrit  element  forms  such  an  integral  part  of  the  Malay vocabulary  that,  in  spite  of  the  subsequent  infusion  of  Arabic  and Persian  words  adopted  in  the  usual  course  of  Mohammedan  conquest, it  has  retained  its  ancient  citizenship  in  the  language.
It  is  not  difficult  then  to  believe  that  the  Andamans  formed  part of  what  was  originally  known  as  Rama's  Bridge,  and  the  Andaman- ese  were  thought  to  be  the  Hanumans,  the  scene  being  afterwards changed  to  Palk  Straits,  though  what  is  now  known  as  Adam's  Bridge was  a  continuous  isthmus,  not  broken  up  into  its  present  form until  1480.
Indeed,  according  to  Wilford,  Hindu  legends  noticed  the  remark- able chain  of  islands  from  Cape  Negrais  to  Achin,  and  ascribe  it  to Eaina  who  attempted  here  first  to  bridge  the  sea,  an  enterprise  after- wards transferred  to  Palk  Straits  and  Adam's  Bridge.
The  existence  of  the  Andamanese,  who  were  credited  with  dogs' faces  and  tails  (which  latter  feature  was  probably  derived  from,  the bushy-tailed  waistbelts  they  wear),  will  then  fully  account  for  the Hanumans.
Narcondam  may  also  thus  be  a  similar  Malay  corruption  of  some Sanskrit  word  having  a  general  or  descriptive  meaning,  though  not necessarily  the  "  Narak  "  hitherto  insisted  on.
The  Orang  Laut,  or  Malay  "  Sea  Gipsies  "  of  the  English  writers, who  have  always  borne  a  sufficiently  bad  reputation  as  pirates  and general  evil-doers,  were  probably  the  section  of  the  Malay  people  who had  most  to  do  with  the  Andamans.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
CHAPTER  II.
The  Andamanese — Their  division  into  Tribes — The  sub-division  of  the  Tribes  into Septs — Their  division  into  \r-yatito  a.nd  Erem-taga — Description  of  the  Ar-j/SjZ/o and  Erem-taga — Physical  characteristics  of  the  Andamanese — Diseases  of  the Andamanese — Intelligence  of  the  Andamanese — Tattooing — Names — Nicknames — Flower  Names— Marriage — Medicines — 'Motions,  etc. — Habitations — Government — Language — Initiatory  ceremonies — Marriage — Burial — Customs  at  meeting  and parting — 'Fires — Religion,  traditions,  and  superstitions — Attire — Time— Trade — Sport — Canoes — Cooking — Weapons,  utensils,  and  ornaments — Amusements.
IT  will  be  convenient,  for  the  proper  appreciation  of  the  accounts  of the  Andamanese  by  various  travellers  which  follow,  that  a  brief  gene- ral description  of  the  people,  their  mode  of  life,  customs,  and  supersti- tions, should  be  here  given.
The  Andamanese  are  divided  into  twelve  Tribes,  and  these  Tribes  are grouped  into  three  divisions.
1st. — The  North  Andaman  Group  of  Tribes,  comprising  : —
The  Chariar  Tribe,  inhabiting  the  coast   of   the  northern
half  of  the  North  Andaman,  and  the  adjacent  islands. The  Jeru  Tribe,  inhabiting  the  interior,  and  the   southern half  of    the   coast    of    the  North    Andaman,   and   the northern  extremity  of  the  Middle  Andaman. The   Kede   Tribe,   inhabiting    the   northern   half  of   the
Middle  Andaman,  and  Interview  Island.
The  tribes  composing  this  Group  use  the  same  bow,  the  "  Chdkio," make  comparatively  small  arrows,  have  similar  ornaments,  the  same system  of  tattooing,  and  their  languages  are  closely  allied.  They inhabit  the  country  from  Landfall  Island  to  a  line  drawn  through  the Middle  Andaman,  from  Flat  Island  on  the  West  coast,  to  Amit-la-Te'd on  the  East  coast.
. — The  South  Andaman  Group  of  Tribes,  comprising  : —
The  Aka-.5<£a-da  Tribe,  who  inhabit  the  coast  of  Rutland Island  ;  the  coast,  and  part  of  the  interior  of  the South  Andaman,  south  of  a  line  drawn  from  Port  Mouat
22  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
to  Port  Blair  ;  Termugli  and  the  other  islands  of  the Labyrinth  Group  ;  the  coast,  and  most  of  the  interior, of  the  remaining  portion  of  the  South  Andaman  ;  Bluff and  Spike  Islands  ;  and  the  West  coast  of  the  Middle Andaman  up  to  Flat  Island.
The  Akar-_Ba7<?  Tribe,  who  inhabit  the  Archipehgo^Islands :
The  Piichikwar  Tribe,  who  inhabit  all  the  country  between Middle  Strait  and  Homfray  Strait,  including  Colebrooke, Passage,  and  Strait  Islands ;  and  the  Northern  bank of  Homfray  Strait  for  a  short  distance  inland.
The  Aukau-jMMw  Tribe,  who  inhabit  most  of  the  interior of  the  Southern  half  of  the  Middle  Andaman.
The  Kol  Tribe,  who  inhabit  the  coast,  and  adjacent  islands, and  part  of  the  interior,  of  the  Middle  Andaman, between  Amit-la- Te"d  and  Parl6b.
The  Tribes  composing  this  Group  use  the  same  bow,  the  "  Karama, make  similar  large  arrows,  have  the  same  kind  of  ornaments,  the  same system  of  tattooing,  and  their  languages  are  closely  allied.  They inhabit  that  portion  of  the  Middle  Andaman  South  of  a  line  drawn from  Flat  Island  on  the  West  coast  to  Amit-la-Ted  on  the  East  coast  ; Bdratan  Island ;  most  of  the  South  Andaman ;  the  adjacent  Islands to,  and  including,  Rutland  Island ;  and  the  Archipelago  Islands.
3rd. — The  Onge  Group  of  Tribes,  comprising  : —
The  Doge's,  who  inhabit  the  whole  of  the  Little  Andaman
Island.
The  people  in  the  interior  of  Rutland  Island. The  Tribe  in  the  interior  of  the  South  Andaman. The  Tribe  on  the  North  Sentinel  Island.
The  Tribes  composing  this  Group  have  similar  ornaments  and  uten- sils ;  use  a  kind  of  bow  differing  entirely  from  both  the  "  Ch6kio  "  and "  Karama;"  make  a  different  pattern  of  canoe  ;  do  not  tattoo  them- selves ;  and  have  allied  dialects.
Some  of  these  Tribes  are  also  sub-divided  into  Septs,  each  Sept having  a  separate  Headman,  but  all  speaking  the  same  language.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  23
The  Aka-_B<?or-da  Tribe  is  sub-divided  into  seven  Septs  :  —
ls£.^-The  people  inhabiting  Rutland  Island,  the  South  and  West coast  of  the  South  Andaman  up  to  Port  Mouat,  and  the Southern  islands  of  the  Labyrinth  Group.
2nd. — The  people  inhabiting  the  Northern  islands  of  the Labyrinth  Group,  and  the  West  coast  of  the  South Andaman  from  Port  Mouat  to  Port  Campbell.
3rd. — The  people  inhabiting  the  West  coast  from  Port  Campbell to  Spike  Island.
4th. — The  people  inhabiting  the  West  coast  of  the  Middle Andaman  from  Spike  Island  to  Flat  Island.  (These are  more  closely  allied  to  the  Puchikwar  Tribe.)
5th. — The  people  inhabiting  the  East  coast  of  the  South  Anda- man from  Chiriya  Tdpu  to  Port  Blair,  including  the Southern  half  of  that  Harbour.
6th. — The  people  inhabiting  the  Northern  half  of  Port  Blair Harbour,  the  interior  of  the  Eastern  side  of  the  South Andaman,  and  the  East  coast  of  the  South  Andaman up  to  Lekera-Barnga.
7th. — The  people  inhabiting  the  East  coast  of  the  South  Anda- man from  Lekera-Barnga  to  the  Middle  Strait.
The  Akar-_Ba/<£  are  sub-divided  into  the  North  and  South  Archi- pelago Tribes,  who  speak  different  dialects,  the  division  being  between Havelock  and  Lawrence  Islands.
The  Puchikwdr  Tribe  is  sub-divided  into  : —
1st. — The  people  living  between  Middle  Strait  and  the  North end  of  Colebrooke  Island.
2nd. — The  people  living  on  both  banks  of  the  West  end  of Homfray  Strait.
3rd. — The  people  living  on  both  banks  of  the  East  end  of  Hom- fray Strait.  (These,  in  language  and  customs,  much resemble  the  Kol  Tribe.)
4th. — The  people  living  in  the  interior  of  the  Middle  Andaman North  of  Homfray  Strait.
24  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  GELATIONS
The  A.\ika.u.-Juwoi  and  Kol  Tribes  have  no  real  sub-divisions. The  K£d6  Tribe  is  sub-divided  into  three  Septs  :  — 1st. — The  people  inhabiting  the  Eastern  side  of  the  Middle  Anda- man, whose   language   differs  slightly  from  that  of   the other  Septs 2nd. — The  people   living  on  the  West  and  North-west    of   the
Middle  Andaman. 3rd. — The  people  on  Interview  and  North  Reef  Islands.
The  Jem  Tribe  is  sub-divided  into  five  Septs  : — 1st. — The  people  on  the  South  side  of  Stewart's  Sound. Snd. — The  people  on  the  North  side  of  Stewart's  Sound. 3rd. — The  people  on  the  East  coast  of  the  North  Andaman. 4<A.--The  people  in  the  interior   of   the   Southern   part   of   the
North  Andaman. 5th. — The  people  on  the  West  coast  of  the  North  Andaman.
The  Chariar  Tribe  is  sub -divided  into  four  Septs —
1st — The  people  in  and  around  Port  Cornwallis.
2nd. — The  people  in  and  around  Cadell  Bay.
3rd. — The  people  on  Landfall  and  the  adjacent  islands.
4th. — The  people  on  the  North-west  coast  of  the  North  Andaman. The  sub-divisions  of  the  Onge  Tribe  on  the  Little  Andaman  are  not thoroughly  known  as  yet,  but  appear  to  be—
1st. — The  people  on   the    North  coast,  from  Bumila   Creek   to Kual-Echekwada.
Snd. — The  people  on  the  North-east  coast,  from  Kual-Echekwada to  Titaije'.
3rd. — The  people  on  the  East  coast,  from  Titaije  to  Tolnyugeda,
4th  — The  people  in  Daogule  Bay.
5th.  —  The  people  in  Hut  Bay,  and  down  to  Toibalowe".
6th. — The  people  on  the  South  coast.
7th. — The  people  on  the  South-west  coast,  up  to  Api  Island.
8th. — The  people  from  Api  Island  to  Nachuge".
9th. — The  people  from  Jackson  Creek  to  Tdkyui.
10th.— The  Palalankwe'  people.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  25
There  may  be  other  Septs  in  the  interior  of  whom  wo  know nothing  at  present.  The  customs  of  the  people  on  the  Little  Andaman differ  considerably  from  those  of  the  people  on  the  Great  Andaman, and  the  huts  on  the  former  Island  are  large  and  permanent  head- quarter stations,  so  that  each  of  these  may  be  considered  the  head- quarters of  a  Sept.
The  North  Sentinel  Island  people  are  one  Tribe  without  sub-divi- sions, but  we  know  little  of  them,  and  they  appear  to  be  a  recent offshoot  from  the  Onges.
The  Jarawa  tribe  on  Rutland  Island  are  one  Tribe,  and,  so  far  as we  know,  have  no  sub-divisions.
The  Jarawa  tribe  in  the  interior  of  the  South  Andaman  are  one Tribe,  but  appear  to  have  at  least  three  sub-divisions,  of  the  details  of which  we  are  ignorant.
The  Andamanese  are  also  divided,  irrespective  of  Tribal  divisions, into  the  "  Ay-yduto  "  or  "  Coast-dwellers,"  and  the  "  Erem-tdga " or  "  Jungle -dwellers."
(These  names  df  course  vary  in  the  different  languages,  but  the meaning  in  all  is  the  same,  and  the  above  words  of  the  Aka--C<?a-da language  will  be  used,  for  convenience  sake,  when  referring  to  all  the tribes.)
Many  tribes  contain  members  of  both  these  divisions. In  the  South  Andaman  Group  of  Tribes,  those  Aka--Be'«-da  living between  Port  Blair  Harbour  and  Middle  Strait,  in  the  interior of  the  South  Andaman,  are  Erem-taga.    The  remainder  of  the Tribe  are  Ay-yduto. All  the  Akar--BtWe  are  Ar-ydulo.
Those  Piichikwar  living  in  the  interior  of  the  Middle  Andaman, North  of  Homfray  Strait,  are  Erem-tdga.  The  remainder  are Ai-yduto.
Almost  all  the  Aukau-Jwzcoa  are  ICrem-tdga. All  the  Kol  are  Ar-ydiito.
The  Kede  Tribe  is  composed  of  both  Ar-yduto  and  firem-taga, according  as  they  dwell  on  the  coast  or  inland,  the  only  firem-
2Q  A   HISTORY  OF  OUK  NEGATIONS
taga,  however,  being  the  people  in  the  interior  of  the  North- ern half  of  the  Middle  Andaman.
The  Je*ru  Tribe  is  composed  of  both  Af-yduto  and  Erem-taga,  but principally  of  the  latter,  the  only  Ar-yduto   being  those  people living  in  Stewart's  Sound  and  on  the  West  coast  of  the  South- ern part  of  the  North  Andaman. The  Chariar  Tribe  is  composed  of  Ar-yduto  only. The  Onges  no  doubt  have  similar  divisions,  but  at  present  we  are
only  acquainted  with  what  we  may  call  the  Ar-yduto. The  North  Sentinel    Tribe    are     Erem-taga    by    nature,     and Af-yduto  by  force  of   circumstances  ;    (indeed,  comparing   all the  Tribes  of  the  Onge  Group  with  the  real   As-ydtito   of  the Great  Andaman,  this  may  be  said  of  all  of  them.) The  Jarawa  Tribes  on  Rutland  Island,  and  in  the  interior  of   the
South  Andaman,  are  Erem-taga.
The  principal  differences  between  Ar-yduto  and  Erem-taga,  are — The  former  residing  chiefly   on    the   coast,  and   obtaining   their food  principally  from  the   sea,  are  more   expert   at  swimming   and diving,  fish  shooting,    etc.,   have   a  better   knowledge  of   fishes   and marine  life,  and  are  hardier  and  braver  than  the  Erem-taga.
These  latter  are  more  expert  at  tracking,  or  finding  their  way through  the  jungle,  at  pig  hunting,  etc.,  have  a  better  knowledge  of the  Fauna  and  Flora  of  the  Andamans,  but  are  timid  and  more cunning.
They  are  unable  to  harpoon  turtle  and  dugong,  and  thus,  while the  As-yduto  can  do  all  that  the  Erem-taga  can  do,  though  often  not so  well,  in  addition  to  his  own  peculiar  accomplishments,  the  Erem- taga  is  ignorant  of  much  which  the  Ar-yduto  knows.  The  two  divi- sions are  allowed  to  inter-marry.
Fights  take  place  between  sub-divisions  of  the  same  Tribe,  and between  Ar-yduto  and  Erem-taga,  who  do  not  mix  much.
The  Andamanese  are  on  friendly  relations  with  each  other  as follows  : —
Most  friendly  within  their  families.
WITH  THE  ASUAMANE8E.  07
Friendly  within  their  Septs.
Fairly  friendly  within  their  Tribes.
On  terms  of  courtesy  with   the  members  of  other  Tribes  of  the
same  Group,  if  known. Hostile  to  the  Tribes  within  their  own   Group  whom  they  do  not
know,  and  to  all  other  Andamaneso,  and  to  all  strangers. An  Andamanese  belongs  to  a  Tribe,  and  is  also  Ax-yduto  or  ]5rem. taga,  by  descent.  A  child  of  one  Tribe  may  become  a  member  of another  by  adoption,  and  occasionally  the  child  of  an  Eretn-td^a may  be  brought  up  an  Ax-yduto,  but  an  Ar-yduto  never  becomes  an Erem-taga,  the  former  despising  the  latter.
The  average  height  of  an  Andamanese  man  is  4  feet,  10^  inches.
The  average  height  of  an  Andamanese  woman  is  4  feet,  6  inches.
The  average  bodily  temperature  of  an  Andamanese  man  is   99° Fahrenheit.
The   average  bodily  temperature  of  an  Andamanese  woman  is 99°'5'  Fahrenheit.
The  average  number  of  pulse  beats  per  minute  of  an  Andamanese man  is  82,
The  average  number  of  pulse  beats  per  minute  of  an  Andamanese woman  is  93.
The  average  number  of  respirations  per  minute  of  a  man  is  19.
The  average  number  of  respirations  per  minute  of  a  woman  is  16.
The  breathing  is,  in  most  cases,  abdominal  or  upper   abdominal.
The  women  show  scarcely  any  indication  of  their  breathing,  though the  men  show  it  well.
The  average  weight  of  an  Andamanese  man  is  96  fts.,  10  oz.
The  average  weight  of  a  woman  is  87  fcs.
It  will  be  seen  from  the  above  that  the  bodily  temperature  of  the Andamanese,  though  very  near  that  of  the  Aryan  family,  has  a  slight tendency  to  rise  above  the  normal  of  that  family,  and  it  is uncertain  what  is  the  reason  for  this  higher  reading.
Apparently,  there  is  no  marked  fever  or  other  disease  present,  as there  are  absolutely  no  signs  or  symptoms  of  an  abnormal  condition,
x  2
2S  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
nor  do  the  Andamanese  themselves  recognise  any  difference  in  this respect.  As  their  food  is  largely  carbonaceous,  their  diet  may  be  the cause,  or  possibly  from  always  living  in  a  malarious  country  there may  be  a  slight  masked  fever  extending  over  some  weeks  in  duration  to which  the  Andamanese  are  so  accustomed  that  they  fail  to  notice  it. There  is  no  doubt  that  they  frequently  suffer  from  a  degree  or  two  of masked  fever  much  as  street  boys  in  England  appear  to  have  a  slight running  cold,  and  this  has  so  little  influence  on  their  actions  and general  appearance  that  they  state  they  are  perfectly  well  when  their temperature  is  over  100°  Fahrenheit.  This  feverishness  is  generally traceable  to  chills,  and  there  is  little  or  no  splenic  disease.
They  dislike  and  fear  cold  very  much,  and  do  not  bear  it  well sensitively,  but  when  taken  to  an  Indian  climate  which  was  much colder  than  their  own,  though  inconvenienced  they  were  not  injured in  any  way,  and  indeed  improved  in  general  health.
They  bear  the  heat  of  the  sun  well,  but  complain  sometimes,  get bad  headaches,  sun  fever,  etc.  They  go  stark  naked,  and  with  no covering  on  their  heads,  at  midday,  on  sea  or  land,  in  the  hottest weather,  not  however  from  choice  during  the  middle  of  the  day,  as they  do  not  court  the  exposure  unnecessarily.  Sometimes  they  hold a  leaf  umbrella  over  their  heads  if  out  in  a  canoe  in  a  very  hot  sun. The  fact,  however,  of  their  knowing  that  they  had  to  undergo  this exposure  would  not  deter  them  from  any  journey,  etc.,  while  the  fear of  a  similar  exposure  to  cold  would  certainly  deter  them.
They  do  not  bear  thirst  at  all  well,  and  hunger  almost  equally badly.
They  are  ac3ustomed  to  gratify  both  the  moment  they  feel  the sensation,  and  not  being  used  to  privations  cannot  endure  them.
They,  for  similar  reasons,  cannot  ordinarily  endure  for  more  than twenty- four  hours  without  sleep,  though  they  have  been  known  on the  occasions  of  big  dances  to  go  for  four  days  and  nights  almost entirely  without  sleep,  becoming  much  exhausted  afterwards.
The  voices  of  the  Andamanese,  though  in  a  few  marked  cases  deep and  hoarse,  are  ordinarily  of  a  pleasant  medium  quality  and  rather musical.  Their  breath  is  ordinarily  sweet,  and  there  is  no  smell  from
WITH  THE  ANDAH. \NESE.
29
the  healthy  bodies  of  the  younger  Andarnanese.  Any  offensive  smell there  might  be,  would  come  from  the  dirt  on  them,  not  from  the secretions  of  the  body.  People  with  decayed  teeth  and  tissues  have foul  smelling  breaths  and  bodies,  and  the  scorbutic  taint  may  account for  much  of  this  as  there  is  a  good  deal  of  a  mild  form  of  scurvy among  them,  probably  due  to  the  absence  at  certain  times  of  the  year of  vegetable  food,  or  to  chills.
They  are  by  nature  "far-sighted,"  and  any  apparent  "near- sightedness  "  is  due  to  leuooma  or  other  disease  dimming  the  sight and  causing  them  to  study  the  article  looked  at  much  closer,  for  dis- tinctness' sake,  than  is  usual.
In  appearance,  when  not  smeared  over  with  red  and  white  pig- ments, the  Andamanese  men,  and  the  young  women,  are  not  unpleas- ing,  some  indeed  are  distinctly  good-looking  and  have  fine,  well-shaped noses,  thin  lips,  small  mouths,  even  white  teeth,  bright  sparkling eyes,  and  very  well  shaped  figures.  The  old  people  often  become hideous.
With  the  Andamanese  sexual  desire  generally  commences  at  about 15  years  of  age  in  the  men,  and  as  their  love  for  sport  is  greater  than their  passions,  these  are  not  gratified  to  any  great  extent  until  after marriage,  which  rarely  takes  place  before  the  man  is  26.  Probably, for  this  reason,  the  Andamanese  men  keep  a  boyish  appearance  until they  are  about  30,  and  age  very  little  till  after  40.
From  24  to  38  an  Andamanese  man  scarcely  alters  in  appearance, though  their  figures,  the  sheen  of  their  skin,  and  the  delicacy  of  their features,  are  best  seen  at  the  former  age,  for  as  they  grow  older  the skin  becomes  more  coarse,  and  the  figure  "  wall-sided ;  "  the  eyes too,  which  are  very  clear  in  youth,  become  dulled  in  after  life.  The teeth  also  become  worn  and  discoloured  with  age,  though  little  caries is  seen.  The  teeth  of  the  Onges,  however,  are  uneven,  and  discoloured, and  some  suppose  that  this  tribe  have  hereditary  syphilis  from  some distant  period,  though  possibly  scurvy,  or  the  water  they  drink,  may have  something  to  do  with  it.  Elephantiasis  only  occurs  on  the Little  Andaman.  The  Andamanese  vary  in  colour  from  an  intense charcoal  black  all  over,  -which  is  most  common  in  the  South  Andaman
30
A   HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
Group  of  Tribes,  to  black  with  reddish-brown  on  the  collar  bones, cheek  bones,  and  other  points  of  the  body,  and,  among  the  Onges,  to even  a  light  reddish-brown  on  parts  of  the  face.
The  black  pigment  occasionally  leaves  their  fingers  and  lips,  giving these  a  peculiar  piebald  appearance,  and  this  lasts  till  death,  the  pig- ment never  returning.  The  cause  is  unknown,  there  is  no  remedy  for it,  and  no  notice  is  taken  of  it  by  the  Andamanese.
The  colour  of  their  hair  varies  from  sooty  black  to  dark  brown, old  gold,  red,  and  light  brown,  especially  as  it  increases  in  length. Though  these,  however,  may  be  the  colours  of  individual  hairs,  the general  appearance  is  sooty  black,  or  yellowish-brown.
The  different  Tribes  vary  in  their  mode  of  wearing  their  hair ;  some, chiefly  in  the  South  Andaman  Group,  shaving  the  head  clean  ;  many of  the  people  throughout  the  Great  Andaman  let  their  hair  grow  in long  matted  ringlets  till  it  touches  their  shoulders  ;  the  Jarawas  often grow  a  mop  of  hair  like  a  Papuan,  and  the  Onge"s  keep  their  hair  cut very  short.
Excessive  hairiness  of  the  body  never  occurs.  Total  absence  of hair  is  equally  unknown,  but  in  all  cases  the  hair,  except  on  the  head, is  very  scanty.  Some  men  have  a  tiny  beard  and  moustache,  of  which they  are  very  proud,  and  the  fact  of  such  men  being  spoken  of  as "  hairy  "  shows  how  rare  the  Andamanese  consider  this  adornment to  be.
There  is  a  little  hair  on  the  pubes,  and  this,  like  the  beard  and moustache,  is  not  shaved.  The  eyebrows,  which  are  small,  are  often shaved  off,  for  no  particular  reason  except  that  they  are  not  considered to  be  ornamental.  There  is  a  little  hair  under  the  axilla,  and  some- times a  trace  on  the  arms  and  legs.
The  oily  secretion  is  abundant,  and  the  skin  is  smooth  and  satiny where  not  tattooed.
The  colour  of  the  skin  is  usually  the  colour  of  black  lead  in  the parts  exposed  to  the  air,  and  reddish  or  yellowish-brown  under  the axilla.  The  lips  and  the  nostrils  are  black,  and  the  soles  of  the  feet brownish-yellow.  In  a  few  cases  the  skin  on  the  cheek  bones,  and other  prominent  points  of  the  face  and  body,  is  reddish-brown.  A
WITH  THE  ANDAMANE8E.
31
pitch  of  black  skiu  kept  free  from  the  light  for  years,  as  in  the  case of  the  skiu  of  the  head  covered  with  a  thick  mat  of  hair,  does  not become  lighter  in  colour.
The  eyes  are,  as  a  rule,  dark  brown  in  colour,  liquid  and  clear,  or sometimes  very  dark  brown,  dull,  aud  with  a  ring  of  black  round  the iris.  They  are  prominent,  and  have  the  outer  angles  very  slightly elevated.
The  mouth  is  large,  the  hard  palate  very  arched,  and  piginentcd in  patches.
There  are  very  few  cases  of  natural  deformities,  and  the  only  artifi- cial deformity  is  the  mark  across  the  skull  caused  by  the  strap  used  in carrying  loads.  This  is  most  marked  in  the  women,  who  carry  big bundles  of  firewood,  etc.,  and,  as  they  commence  to  do  this  at  about the  age  of  six,  it  causes  not  only  a  mark  on  the  skin  and  flesh,  but also  an  actual  depression  in  the  skull.  This  is  most  marked  among the  Ong<5s.  No  parts  of  the  body  are  pierced,  injured,  or  deformed intentionally  for  the  wearing  of  ornaments  or  for  any  other  purpose.
Monorchids  are  found,  and  also  cases  of  atrophied  testicles.
The  duration  of  life  among  the  Andamanese  is  about  sixty  years, and  cases  of  people  attaining  to  about  sixty-five  are  known.
Congenital  idiocy  is  rare,  and  little  notice  is  taken  of  it.  The only  form  of  insanity  known  is  homicidal  mania,  which  is  also  rare. The  subjects  commence  by  eating  raw  flesh,  earth,  and  such  unnatural things.  After  they  commit  a  murder  they  eat  the  raw  fat  and  drink the  blood  of  the  victim.  These  men  are  much  dreaded  for  a  time  by the  others,  but  end  by  being  killed  in  revenge  for  some  murder  they have  committed.
Epidemics  and  endemics  are  absent  from  the  Andaman  Islands, unless  malarial  fevers  be  classed  as  the  latter.  The  greatest  number of  cases  of  these  fevers  occur  about  June,  at  the  commencement  of the  South-west  Monsoon,  and  also  during  the  heavy  bursts  of  rain in  this  Monsoon,  the  causes  being  the  reduction  of  temperature,  and the  humid  atmosphere.  The  drying  up  of  the  soil  at  the  end  of  the Eains  is  also  considered  to  be  unhealthy.
32  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
The  diseases  of  the  Andamanese  and  of  the  immigrant  races  are the  same.  The  most  prevalent  diseases  are  : —
Malarial  fevers,  of  which  the  Intermittent  form,  being  91  per cent,  of  the  whole,  is  the  most  common.  In  this  group,  34  cases per  1,000  are  fatal,  the  deaths  being  due  to  the  Remittent  form.
The  proportion  of  chest  diseases,  though  not  so  large  as  that  of Malarial  fevers,  is  considerable,  being  to  the  latter  as  9  is  to  7.  The cases  are,  however,  more  fatal.  During  certain  years,  when  the wind  is  exceptionally  high  and  the  rainfall  less  than  usual,  these diseases  are  particularly  deadly,  death  being  generally  due  to  Pneu- monia, always  a  most  fatal  disease  to  the  Andamanese,  the  virulent epidemic  form  of  which  has  probably  been  introduced  since  1858. Chronic  Bronchitis  is  responsible  for  the  high  sick-rate  of  this  group (60  per  cent.),  but  deaths  from  it  are  not  common.
The  fatal  cases  of  this  group  are  10  S  per  1,000,  of  which  Pneu- monia is  90  per  cent,  of  the  whole.
Pleurisy,  Haemoptysis,  and  Phthisis  are  comparatively  rare,  but there  is  a  general  tendency  to  Bronchial  Catarrh.
Abdominal  diseases  are  not  common,  there  being  a  very  small percentage  of  them,  but  are  very  fatal.  Diarrhoaa  is  the  most  com- mon  and  causes  the  most  deaths,  there  being  112  per  1,000.
When  in  health  their  stools  are  regular,  inclining  to  looseness, similar  to  those  of  animals  in  good  health.  They  have  abundant  perspi- ration which  is  only  unpleasant  smelling  in  certain  individual  cases.
There  is  a  great  deal  of  Dyspepsia,  and  Colic  is  common.
No  Typhoid  or  Typhus  fevers  are  known,  though  the  Andamanese will  drink  water  of  the  filthiest  appearance.
Diseases  of  the  brain  and  spinal  cord  are  rare,  though  occasional cases  of  curvature  of  the  spine  are  met  with.
Sunstroke  is  known  to,  and  dreaded  by  the  Andamanese,  as  cases of  it  are  always  fatal.
Rheumatic  affections  are  common  among  the  older  Andamanese often  causing  complete  loss  of  use,  and  the  withering  away  of  a  limb. It  is  of  the  muscular  variety.
Conjunctivitis  is  rather  common,  as  is  also  Leucoma.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  33
Ulcers,  generally  the  result  of  wounds,  are  common,  and  are  very slow  to  heal.
There  is  a  great  deal  of  exfoliated  Dermatitis,  either  scorbutic  or due  to  exposure,  sometimes  resulting  in  the  destruction  of  the  fin^'oi- •and  toe  nails.
Ringworm  is  the  only  other  skin  disease  known.
There  is  no  limited  baldness,  but  temporary  general  baldness  from disease  is  known.  In  these  cases  the  hair  is  always  weak  afterwards. The  Andamanese  readily  succumb  to  a  severe  injury  or  disease,  but, though  they  seem  to  have  little  vital  power,  they  pick  up  wonderfully quickly  after  illness.
They  have  a  tendency  to  Prognathism,  which,  however,  is  only strongly  marked  in  a  few  instances,  and  in  many  cases  absolute OrthognatMsm  is  met  with.
The  intellect  of  the  Andamanose  youth,  and  his  capacity  for  grasp- ing matters  entirely  foreign  to  his  natural  state,  is  considerable, and  I  have  noticed  that  this  special  intelligence  (as  distinct  from hunting  ability,  etc.,  which  is  of  the  savage  order)  is  usually  accom- panied by  refined  features  (especially  the  nose  and  mouth),  also  by an  irritable  temper,  indicative  of  the  nervous  temperament.
This  intelligence,  and  the  tractability  and  usefulness  of  the  Anda- manese men,  becomes  less  (as  regards  subjects  foreign  to  their  origi- nal savage  life  only)  after  they  pass  forty  years  of  age.  They  then become  more  savage  and  quarrelsome  in  disposition.
They  are  gentle  and  pleasant  to  each  other,  and  kind  to  children, but,  having  no  legal  or  other  restraint  on  their  passions,  are  easily roused  to  anger,  when  they  commit  muruer.  They  are  certainly  cruel, and  are  jealous,  treacherous,  and  vindictive ;  they  have  short  memories for  either  good  or  evil,  are  quick  tempered,  and  have  little  or  no  idea of  gratitude.  They  are  affectionate  to  their  wives,  and  their  worst qualities  are  kept  for  grangers.  I  have  often  likened  them  to  English country  schoolboys  of  the  labouring  classes,  with  the  passions  of  the mature  savage.
They  are  bright  and  merry  companions,  sticking  to  nothing  for long,  always  busy  in  their  own  pursuits,  keen  sportsmen,  and  very
34  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
independent.  Their  actions  are  governed  by  ideas  of  prowess  in  the chase,  etc.,  and  not  being  naturally  of  a  very  lustful  nature,  sexual passion  does  not  enter  largely  into  their  lives.  They  are  proud  of having  children  and  anxious  to  get  them,  but  their  passions  are  purely animal,  and  never  bestial  as  is  the  case  with  more  highly  civilised races.
The  intelligence  of  the  women,  although  not  generally  equal  to that  of  the  men,  is  fair.  The  old  women  among  the  Andamanese  are often  very  capable  and  much  respected  ;  they  live  on  an  average  to  a greater  age  than  the  men,  and,  when  aged,  keep  excellent  health  and the  full  use  of  their  faculties.  They  do  not  become  peevish  and querulous  in  old  age,  but  retain  the  bright  and  merry  nature  of  their youth.
They  are  considered  to  be  beings  subordinate  to  the  men,  and  the wives  are  practically  slaves  to  their  husbands  for  whom  they  have  to perform  all  the  drudgery.  They  acquiesce  in  this,  and  keep  together in  parties  of  their  own  sex;  the  fact  of  their  inferiority,  however, being  once  recognised,  they  have  a  good  deal  of  influence  and  are under  no  restrictions.
Allowing  for  the  acuteness  gained  by  practice  and  necessity,  the sight  of  the  Andamanese  does  not  appear  to  be  superior  to  that  of  an ordinary  European,  who,  if  he  passed  through  the  same  training, would  see  as  well  as  they  do.  I  have  [heard  astonishment  expressed at  the  way  in  which  they  will  accurately  name  another  Andamanese who  may  be  at  a  considerable  distance,  but  it  should  be  remembered that  they  distinguish  by  gait,  etc.,  as  we  do,  and  moreover  they  know whom  they  expect  to  see  in  a  particular  place,  and  are  therefore  on the  look-out.  I  have  seen  them,  when  not  thus  prepared,  make  many mistakes,  while  a  European  standing  by  them  gave  accurately  the names  of  the  persons  seen.
They  do  not  care  for  our  scents,  or  for  the  smell  of  flowers,  nor  do they  decorate  themselves  with  them,  like  the  South  Sea  Islanders.  They do  not  distinguish  individuals  in  the  dark  by  smell,  and  their  sense  of smell  does  not  appear  to  be  particularly  keen.  Fires  can  be  smelt  at
WITH  TUB  ANDAMAtfKSE.
a  distance  of  two  miles  certainly,  but  much  depends  on  the  direction and  force  of  the  wind,  the  nature  of  the  wood  fuel  (some  being  highly and  objectionably  odoriferous),  also  whether  turtle  fat  or  other strong  smelling  things  are  burning.  They  can  smell  a  fire  farther than  a  European  can  because  they  are  on  the  look-out  for  such  things (as  they  can  hear  the  sound  of  a  dance  at  some  distant  encampment) and  consequently  their  senses  in  those  particular  matters  are  more highly  trained  and  developed  than  ours,  but  I  do  not  think  that naturally  their  senses  are  any  keener  than  those  of  any  other  race.
The  last  point  to  be  noticed  in  the  personal  description  of  tho Andamanese  is  their  modes  of  tattooing,  or  rather  scarifying  them- selves.
The  Tribes  of  the  South  Andaman  Group  cut  their  bodies  with small  flakes  of  quartz  or  glass  in  patterns  of  zig-zags  or  straight  lines running  up  and  down  the  body  or  limb.  Each  cut  is  about  a  quarter of  an  inch  in  length,  and  is  merely  superficial,  To  make  a  pattern  of straight  lines,  a  line  of  cuts  is  made,  the  incisions  being  end  to  end and  about  an  eighth  of  an  inch  apart.  Another  line  parallel  to  these, and  about  an  eighth  of  an  inch  distant,  is  then  cut,  and  twelve  or fourteen  of  such  lines  would  make  the  pattern.  In  the  zig-zag  pattern only  two  lines  are  made,  the  cuts  being  incised  at  obtuse  angles  to each  other,  and  thus  forming  something  like  our  "  dog-tooth  "  pattern. The  making  of  the  patterns  depends  upon  the  individual  taste  of  the woman  cutting  them,  but  the  face  and  ears,  genitals,  arm  and  kneo pits  are  not  cut.  The  first  cutting  is  made  from  the  navel  to  the pubes,  and  the  "dog-tooth"  patterns  are  often  cut  on  either  side  of a  line  drawn  from  the  sternal  notch  to  the  navel,  thus  rounding off  the  remainder  of  the  tattooing,  and  imitating  as  it  were  tho edges  of  an  open  waistcoat.  Women  are  tattooed  in  the  same  way  as men.
The  North  Andaman  Group  of  Tribes  have  a  different  system  of tattooing.  The  cuts  with  them  are  made  by  the  men  with  the  head of  a  pig-arrow,  and  are  severe  and  deep.  They  are  made  across  the body  or  limb,  and  are  not  placed  end  to  end  but  parallel  to  each  other.
F  -2
g6  A  HISTORY  O?  OUR  RELATION*
They  are  about  an  inch  in  length  and  half  an  inch  apart,  and  as  a rule  three  lines  of  cuts  are  made,  one  in  the  centre  of  the  back  from the  nape  of  the  neck  to  the  buttocks,  and  one  on  either  side  of  this from  each  shoulder  to  half  way  down  the  buttocks.  These  lines  are about  three  inches  apart.  Occasionally  four  or  five  lines  of  smaller cuts  may  be  seen.
Three  or  four  (sometimes  five)  similar  lines  of  smaller  cuts,  about two  inches  apart,  are  made  from  the  collar  bones  to  the  pubes.  Other smaller  lines  of  cuts  are  made  down,  and  sometimes  circling  round, the  arms  and  legs,  the  cuts  being  on  a  slope  like  the  series  of  slats  of a  half-open  Venetian  blind.
The  women  of  this  Group  are,  as  a  rule,  only  tattooed  when  they become  elderly.
The  Onge"  Group  of  Tribes  do  not  tattoo  themselves.
The  Andamanese,  like  the  rest  of  the  human  race,  have  names  for individuals,  regarding  which  names  there  are  certain  peculiarities worthy  of  notice.
There  are  three  classes  of  Names :
I. — The  Name  the  Andamanese  is  given  in  the  womb,  and  which is  their  Name  throughout  life.  (Of  this  class  there  are  about  twenty Names  in  each  Tribe.)
This  Name  is  given  in  the  following  manner.  When  a  woman knows  that  she  is  with  child  she  calls  that  child  by  some  one  of  the usual  Andamanese  Names  regardless  of  what  its  future  sex  may  be. This  is  called  the  Teng-l'ar-Ula,  or  "  Proper  Name."  When  the  child is  born,  "Ota"  (which  means  Testicles)  is  added  for  a  male  child, and  "  Kata  "  (female  organ  of  generation)  for  a  female.  These  two words  are  only  used  during  babyhood  as  a  rule.
In  the  case  of  twins,  which,  however,  is  almost  unknown,  an  addi- tional Name  would  be  given  after  birth  to  the  second  child.
In  the  case  of  a  first  born  child  named,  say,  "  Bfala,"  dying  soon after  birth,  the  mother  on  her  second  conception  often  gives  the  same Name  to  the  second  child,  and  to  this,  if  of  the  same  sex  as  the  pre- vious one,  the  Nickname  (always  used  after  the  real  Name)  of  "  II"
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  37
"  Twice-born  "   would  be  added,  as  they   believe   that  the  dead  child has  been  born  again.
II.  Nicknames.  —  These   are  given  to  children  on  account  of  some peculiarity,  either  in  their  own  make  or  conduct,  or  in  those   of   their parents  ;   and  additional  Nicknames  are  sometimes  given  as   the  chil- dren grow  up.     Only  one  Nickname  is  used  at  a  time.     They  may  be sarcastic,  alluding  to  a  deformity,  or  to   a  disfigurement   or   eccentri- city ;   they  may  al«o  be  flattering,  or  even  reverential.
III.  Flower  Names.  —  These  are  given  to  Andamanese  women  only, and  their  origin  is  as  follows  :  —
At  her  first  menstruation  an  Andamaneae  girl  is  called  by  the Name  of  whichever  one  of  certain  selected  trees  happens  to  be  in flower  at  the  time,  and  this  Name,  which  is  use-d  before  the  Teng-Y&r- Ula,  is  not  discarded  until  she  becomes  a  mother,  or  elderly.
Often,  in  calling  to  a  young  woman,  ths  Flower  Name  alone  is used.  The  following  table  will  show  the  Flower  Names,  the  principal trees  from  which  these  Names  are  taken,  and  their  approximate  times of  flowering.  (The  Names  are  given  for  convenience  sake  in  the Aka-#<?a-da  language  only.)
Flower  Name.  Name  of  tree.  Time  of  flowering.
/-  November.
Chilip  .  .     Diospyros  Densiflora  .          .  \  1>ecember-
/  January.
^  February.
M6da  .          .     Semecarpus.    Odina  Wodier.    March.
Aura   .          .          .     Chickrassia  Tabularis  .     March.
("
Not  identified
Jidga  .          .  |  AlsQ)  Crotoa  Argyratug        .  j  APril-
Sfcerculia  .          .          .     April,
f  Meliosma  Simplicifolia
(      eosma      mpcoa  .  -)
Pataka          .          •  (  Terminalia  Procera    .  .  j
r  Eugenia,     sp.    .          .  .  •)
Heche  .          -iBubiaoeB  .          .  j  June  and  July.
Chagara        .          .     Pterocarpus  Dalbergioides  .     August.
33  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
Ploioer  Name.  Name  of  tree.  Time  of  flowering ,
Charapa        .          .     Not  identified    .  .          .     September.
Chenra         .         .    Leea  Sambucina  .         •    October.
r  Not  ideutified    .  .          ,-\ Ydlu  '         •         '  I  Also  Eugenia    .  j  November.
The  Andamanese  can  give  no  reason  but  that  of  long  custom  for the  selection  of  tbese  particular  Names,  and  they  are  also  ignorant  of the  reason  why  only  the  above  trees  were  selected  ;  and  though  it  is very  evident  that  the  giving  of  Flower  Names  arose  from  the  com- parison between  the  reproduction  of  human  beings  and  of  plants,  the Andamanese  do  not  now  recognise  this.
They  have  also  certain  Honorifics.  Elderly  male  Andamanese  are called  Mala  as  a  term  of  respect,  also  Mam.  Married  Andamanese women  are  called  Ghana.
The  Names  are  used  in  calling  to  each  other  from  distances  prin- cipally, also  iu  speaking  of  each  other.  It  is  de  rigueur  to  use the  Honorifios,  and  a  young  girl  is  spoken  to  by  her  Elower  Name. Children  do  not  address  their  parents  by  their  Names,  and  youths would  never  use  Nicknames  in  speaking  to  their  elders,  and  not  often the  Proper  Name.  The  Name  is  in  fact  more  of  a  trade  mark  than lor  general  use.  As  there  are  so  few  of  them,  the  Nickname  decides which  of  the  many  people  of  that  Name  is  meant,  and  the  Honorific gives  the  age  and  standing  of  the  person  and  how  to  address  him.  A youth  would  be  called  by  his  Name,  but  more  often  would  be  address- ed as  "youngster."  The  actual  words  for  Names,  etc.,  differ  of course  in  the  different  languages,  but  the  system  is  the  same  through- out all  the  Tribes  of  the  Great  Andaman.
I  cannot  speak  with  certainty  regarding  the  Onge  Group  of  Tribes.
There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  Andamanese  have  ever inter-married  with  any  other  race,  and  their  intense  hostility  to  all strangers  is  against  the  idea.  Rumours  have  been  heard  at  different times  of  long-haired  tribes  on  different  parts  of  the  Islands,  but,  as I  have  had  occasion  to  point  out  elsewhere,  long-haired  does  not necessarily  mean-straight-haired,  and  the  tribes  who  keep  their  hair
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  39
cut  short  would  doubtless  remark  on  those  who  allowed  it  to  grow long  enough  to  touch  the  shoulders.  The  rumours  may,  however,  have possibly  arisen  from  the  advent  of  ship-wrecked  crews,  the  Malay pirates,  or  be  a  tradition  handed  down  from  the  establishment  of  our Settlements  in  Port  Blair  and  Port  Cornwallis  in  179 — ,  but  in  no case  from  cross-breeding  with  foreigners.
The  Andamanese  are  monogamic,  and  though  there  is  a  freedom  of intercourse  between  the  sexes  before  marriage,  after  it  the  husband keeps  faithful  to  his  wife,  as  a  rule,  and  she  to  him.  Her  murder would  be  the  result  of  any  unfaithfulness  on  the  wife's  part,  and possibly  the  murder  of  her  lover  also.  Divorce  is  rare,  and  unknown after  a  child  has  been  born  to  the  married  couple.  Incestuous  mar- riages never  take  place,  and  a  man  prefers  to  marry  into  another Sept,  or  Tribe  of  the  same  Group.
As,  in  another  work,  I  propose  to  answer  in  full  "  Notes  and Queries  on  Anthropology,"  and  give  in  great  detail  all  we  now know  regarding  the  customs,  etc.,  of  the  Andamanese,  I  will  here only  briefly  outline  them.
Medicine. — Red  ochre  taken  externally  and  internally  they  have great  faith  in  ;  bleeding  on  the  forehead  for  fever  and  headache,  and round  the  affected  part  in  abscesses,  is  practised  ;  wreaths  of  human bones  are  tied  round  a  painful  part  ;  and  they  have  some  slight  idea of  dieting  themselves.  Certain  leaves  are  tied  on  the  affected  parts in  diseases,  and  beds  are  made  of  them  in  order  that  their  odour  may be  inhaled.
Motions,  etc. — The  Andamanese  are  good  climbers,  and  rapid walkers  and  runners,  being  able,  when  necessary,  to  travel  consider- able distances  at  a  time.  Their  step  is  free  and  independent.  The J&rawa  tribe  walk  with  their  toes  much  turned  in.
The  Ax-y  ditto  are  excellent  swimmers  and  perfectly  at  home  in  the water ;  the  Erem-taga,  though  not  so  good  in  the  water,  excel  in tracking  through  the  jungle,  though  they  cannot  do  such  feats  of tracking  as  the  Australian  aborigines  accomplish.
Magic,  etc. — They  have  much  faith  in  dreams,  and  in  the  utter- ances of  certain  "  wise  men,"  who,  they  think,  are  able  to  foretell  the
40  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
future,  and  know  what  are  the  intentions  of  the  Deity,  and  what  is passing  at  a  distance.  Like  all  such  "priesthoods"  this  superstition is  used  by  the  "  wise  men  "  to  enhance  their  power  and  comforts,  and to  obtain  articles  they  wish  for  from  others  without  any  real  com- pensation.
Numbers,  etc. — They  cannot  count  with  certainty  beyond  two, and  only  very  vaguely  up  to  five,  this  meaning  a  considerable number.
Habitations,  Nomadism,  etc.— Being  a  nomadic  and  extremely uncleanly  race,  they  do  not,  except  on  the  Little  Andaman,  build large  or  permanent  huts.  A  village  is  usually  a  group  of  about  14 huts  arranged  in  the  form  of  an  oval,  the  centre  of  which  is  kept clean  for  the  dancing  ground,  the  huts  facing  inwards.
A  hut  is  merely  a  patch  of  thatch  placed  on  four  uprights  and some  cross  pieces,  about  4  feet  6  inches  high  in  front,  and  8  inches high  at  the  back.  There  is  no  walling  at  the  sides,  and  each  hut  is about  4  feet  long  by  3  feet  wide,  which  is  sufficient  for  one  family. It  should  be  remembered  that  these  huts  are  in  the  jungle,  which  is  so dense  that,  however  violent  a  storm  may  be  going  on  overhead,  very little  wind  penetrates  to  the  earth,  and  the  rain  drips  straight  down from  the  trees  above.
At  one  end  of  the  oval  would  be  a  larger  hut  for  the  single  men, and  at  the  opposite  end  a  similar  hut  for  the  unmarried  women.
In  unsheltered  spaces,  and  at  the  head-quarters  of  the  Septs, larger  circular  huts  are  built,  sometimes  ten  feet  in  height  and  thirty feet  in  breadth,  the  eaves  of  which  reach  nearly  to  the  ground.  This class  of  hut  is  to  be  seen  at  its  best  on  the  Little  Andaman,  and  I have  seen  one  at  T6I  BalOwe"  about  30  feet  in  height  and  60  feet  in breadth.
When  out  hunting  and  away  from  their  villages  a  mere  break- wind  of  leaves  is  considered  sufficient.  In  each  hut  one  or  more  fires are  kept,  and  just  outside  the  hut  is  a  tiny  platform,  about  18  inches high,  on  which  surplus  food  is  stored.
Government. — Every  man  is  a  law  unto  himself  in  general,  but  the elders  of  the  tribe  have  a  certain  authority,  and  one  man  is  chosen,
WITH  THE  ANIUMANESE.  41
either  from  temper,  combined  with  prowess  iu  hunting  or  fighting,  or else  from  superior  intelligence,  as  Head  of  the  Sept.  He  grows  to  this position  gradually,  and  there  is  no  election  or  formality.  The  Anda- manese  are  not  fond  of  obeying  other  persons,  and  only  band  together and  obey  one  Elder  when  it  is  manifestly  to  their  interests  to  do  so.
Age  commands  respect,  and  young  people  are  deferential  to  their elders.  In  the  case  of  crimes  the  aggrieved  party  takes  the  law  into his  own  hands,  and  either  destroys  the  property  of,  or  wounds,  or murders,  the  offender.  Murder,  theft,  adultery,  destruction  of  pro- perty,  and  assault,  are  the  principal  crimes  they  recognise.  They  have none  of  what  may  be  called  "  the  vices  of  civilisation,"  and  are  not, and  never  were,  cannibals.  The  reasons  for  their  having  been  thought so,  are  —
1st. — That  they  used  to  attack  and   murder   every  stranger  who
came  to  their  shores. 2nd. — That  it  is  the  custom  among  certain  tribes,  although  they
yield  honourable  interment  to  their  own  dead,  to  burn  the
body  of  a  stranger  or  enemy.
The  food  supply  is  far  too  good  and  varied  for  cannibalism  ever to  have  arisen  from  hunger.
Language. — They  have  no  written  language  or  means  of  communi- cation by  signs,  and  each  Tribe  has  a  dialect  of  its  own,  these  dialects being  almost  mutually  unintelligible,  except  where  fusion  of  the  dia- lects has  occurred  on  conterminous  borders.  The  dialects  have  most  of the  roots  of  the  words  in  common,  but  with  different  intonations,  pre- fixes, suffixes,  etc.  The  languages  are  agglutinative  in  form,  and  the functions  of  gender,  declension,  and  conjugation  of  Aryan  languages are  discharged  by  prefixes  and  suffixes,  while  the  root  is  not  inflected. Major  Temple  writes  of  them  that  "  they  are  one  group,  and  are connected  with  no  other  group."
The  languages  are  copious  in  having  many  words  to  express  varia- tions of  the  same  thing,  but  in  some  points,  where  distinctive  words might  be  expected,  only  one  generic  term  is  used,  the  meaning  being gathered  from  the  context.  The  Andamanese  speak  about  what
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  KELATIONS
interests  and  affects  themselves,  and  have  no  -words  for  abstract  ideas, which  they  know  nothing  of.
Initiatory  ceremonies. — Youths,  as  they  attain  to  about  12  to  16 years  of  age,  abstain  from  certain  foods,  and  after  some  years  of  this abstention  the  food  is  eaten  again  amid  certain  simple  ceremonies  and dances.  It  is  probable  that  puberty  was  originally  the  cause  of  these, and  the  wish  on  the  part  of  the  aspirant  to  show  that  he  was  capable of  maintaining  a  family.  Some  five  or  six  different  foods  are  ab- stained from  in  turn,  and  at  the  end  of  the  last  of  these  fasts  the initiate  would  be  considered  to  be  a  man.  Certain  Honorifics  belong to  persons  undergoing  these  ceremonies,  but  no  secrets  are  commu- nicated, nor  is  there  anything  religious  about  them.  A  curious custom  is  that,  when  two  men  undergo  the  ceremony  together,  it forms  a  great  bond  of  friendship  between  them,  and  they  would  never afterwards  call  each  other  by  name,  or  abuse  each  other,  or  fight : indeed,  there  seems  to  be  a  mutual  shyness  and  avoidance.
Women  have  similar  customs  to  the  men.
Marriage. — The  simple  ceremony  which  constitutes  marriage among  the  Andamanese,  and  has  nothing  religious  about  it,  is  consi- dered strictly  binding  by  this  people.
"When  the  elders  of  the  Sept  are  aware  that  a  young  couple  are anxious  to  be  married,  the  bride  is  taken  to  a  newly  made  empty  hut and  made  to  sit  down  in  it.  The  bridegroom  runs  away  into  the  jungle, but,  after  some  struggling  and  pretence  at  hesitation,  is  brought  in  by force  and  made  to  sit  down  on  the  bride's  lap.  This  is  the  whole  of the  ceremony.  The  newly  married  eouple  have  little  to  say  to,  and are  very  shy  of,  each  other,  for  at  least  a  month  after  marriage,  when they  gradually  settle  down  together.
Divorce  is  very  uncommon,  but  after  the  death  of  one  party,  or  a divorce,  the  Andamanese  marry  again.  The  average  number  of children  born  from  one  mother  is  three,  but  instances  of  seven  and eight  are  known.  Only  one  case  of  twins  has  been  heard  of,  and  both children  died  shortly  after  birth.
JBurial. — Babies   are  buried  under  the  floor  of    their  parents'
WITH  THE  ANDAMANES&  43
hut.  Adults  are  either  huried  in  a  shallow  grave,  or,  which  is  more honourable,  arc  tied  up  in  a  bundle  and  placed  on  a  platform  up  in  a tree.  Plumes  of  cano  loaves  are  then  fastened  conspicuously  in  the neighbourhood  to  mark  the  vicinity  of  a  corpse,  and  that  part  of  tin- country  is  deserted  for  about  three  months.  At  the  end  of  this  period the  relations  and  friends  of  the  deceased,  who  have  been  in  mourning, covered  with  grey  clay,  and  have  refrained  from  dancing  ;  disinter,  or take  down  as  the  case  may  be,  the  bones  of  the  deceased,  wash  them, break  them  up  into  suitable  yieces,  and  make  them  into  ornaments  to which  great  importance  is  attached,  as  they  are  believed  to  stop  pain and  cure  diseases  by  simple  application  to  the  diseased  part.
A  dance  then  takes  place,  when  the  mourning  is  said  to  be  "  taken off,"  and  the  mass  of  grey  clay  on  the  head  is  actually  removed.
Meeting,  Parting,  etc. — The  Andamanese  on  the  Great  Anda- man have  the  extraordinary  custom  of  weeping  loudly  and  de- monstratively when  they  meet  after  a  long  separation,  and  this  may last  for  some  hours.  The  Onges  sit  on  each  other's  laps,  caress  each other  with  their  hands,  and  shed  a  few  silent  tears  only.
At  parting  the  Great  Andaman  Tribes  blow  on  each  other's  hands and  exchange  sentences  corresponding  in  intention  to  our  "  good-bye," etc.  It  is  not  etiquette  to  show  much  emotion  at  other  times,  and they  have  no  words  for  ordinary  salutations  or  returning  thanks.
Fires. — Those  eminent  antliropologists  who  study  savages  from  their firesides  in  England,  and  criticise  and  contemn  the  work  of  observers on  the  spot  from  their  own  lofty  standpoint  of  ignorance  (possibly because  the  results  of  those  observers'  work  do  not  agree  with  their pre-conceived  theories),  are  persuaded  that  the  Andamanese  must know  how  to  make  a  fire,  or  must  have  some  word  in  their  lan- guage showing  that  they  formerly  knew  how  to  make  fires.  The  fact however  remains  that  the  Andamanese  do  not  know,  and,  judging  from their  language,  never  have  known,  how  to  make  fire.  They  are  very careful  of  their  fires,  always  carrying  smouldering  logs  with  them  when they  travel  either  by  sea  or  land,  and  so  sheltering  the  stock  log  that even  in  the  most  inclement  weather  the  fire  does  not  become  extinct. Should  such  a  mishap  however  befall  a  village,  the  people  would  go  to
88
44
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
the  next  encampment  and  obtain  fire  from  there.  According  to  a Prometheus-resembling  legend  of  theirs,  fire  was  stolen  from  Heaven in  the  first  instance  and  has  never  been  allowed  to  become  extinct since.
Religion,  Traditions,  and  Superstitions. — The  Andamanese  believe in  one  God  who  resides  in  heaven  above,  was  the  cause  of  the  exist- ence of  every  body  and  every  thing,  directly  or  indirectly,  and  is somewhat  an  anthropomorphic  conception,  having  passions,  likes  and dislikes,  etc.  He  punishes,  causes  storms,  and  in  fact  corresponds  in many  ways  with  the  European  child's  idea  of  a  Deity.  He  is  not propitiated  in  any  manner  (except  that  the  Andamanese  refrain  from doing  acts  which  they  know  displease  him,  for  they  dread  the  conse- quences of  his  wrath),  and  there  is  no  idea  of  sacrifice,  prayer,  or worship.  There  is  no  love  for  this  Deity,  and  the  acts  displeasing to  Him  are  connected  with  the  products  of  the  jungle,  etc.,  and  do  not affect  the  relations  of  the  Andamanese  towards  each  other.
In  addition  to  Him,  there  are,  as  might  be  expected,  "  the  spirit  of the  woods,"  and  "  the  spirit  of  the  sea,"  who  are  wholly  evil,  also other  minor  evil  spirits.  These  are  said  to  cause  diseases.
There  is  a  variety  and  abundance  of  legends  and  mythological stories  differing  among  the  different  tribes,  but  the  Andamanese  super- stitions amount  to  a  dread  of  the  above-mentioned  spirits,  and  an avoidance  of  the  acts  which  tradition  says  are  displeasing  to  them.
The  Andamanese  are,  however,  of  too  happy  and  careless  a  nature  to be  very  much  biassed  or  affected  by  their  superstitions.  Food,  sport, and  amusement  (with  an  ever  watchful  eye  on  his  neighbour,  and  a quick  temper  of  his  own)  are  the  factors  of  Andamanese  life ;  there  is no  care  for  the  morrow.
They  believe  that  after  death  their  souls  go  into  a  place  under  the earth,  a  sort  of  Elysian  Fields,  but  have  no  idea  of  a  Heaven,  or  of  any place  of  eternal  reward  or  punishment,  nor  do  they  expect  a  resurrec- tion of  the  body,  and  a  life  of  the  world  to  come,  though  some  obser- vers, who  have  not  compared  the  legends  of  all  the  tribes,  will  have  it that  they  do.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
The  anthropological  professors  above-mentioned  are  very  anxious to  prove  that  the  Andamanese  must  have  derived  their  word  for, and  their  idea  of,  a  Deity,  from  some  of  the  more  civilised  nations  with whom  they  may  have  been  brought  into  contact.
Casual  statements  by  incompetent  or  superficial  observers  may have  led  to  this  idea,  but  I  cannot  agree  with  it.  Considering  the great  antiquity  of  the  race  and  their  seclusion  from  other  people,  I  do not  see  why  their  present  ideas  could  not  have  been  handed  down  to them  from  the  earliest  times,  before  the  more  civilised  races  referred to  were  in  existence.  The  very  slight  contact  they  have  had  with  out- side influences  has  been  hostile,  and  to  convey  abstract  ideas  of  a religion  and  a  Deity  it  would  have  been  necessary  for  one  party  to  have learnt  the  language  of  the  other.  We  have  evidence  in  the  present time  to  show  that  Andamanese  who  have  been  educated  in  civilisation for  years,  and  appeared  to  have  lost  their  savage  ways,  have  gone back  to  their  tribe,  entirely  lost  their  veneer  of  civilisation,  and  have not  only  not  introduced  a  single  abstract  idea  among  their  tribesmen, but  have  not  even  altered  their  habits  in  practical  matters  affecting their  comfort,  health,  etc.  The  Andamanese  are  a  very  conservative race,  act  solely  on  the  ideas  transmitted  to  them  from  their  ancestors, and  will  not  alter  these  in  any  way.
Attire. — The  Andamanese  men,  but  for  certain  waistbelts,  neck- laces, etc.,  which  may  be  considered  ornamental,  go  entirely  naked. The  women  of  the  South  Andaman  Group  of  Tribes  wear  a  bunch  of five  or  six  leaves  over  their  private  parts.  The  \vomeu  of  the  North Andaman  Group  of  Tribes  wear  a  sort  of  loose  tassel  of  narrow  strips of  bark  ;  and  the  women  of  the  Ong6  Group  of  Tribes  wear  a  bunchy tassel  of  fibre.
The  Tribes  of  the  Great  Andaman  cover  themselves  over  with clay  pigments  of  which  there  are  three  principal  kinds —
1st. — Plain  grey  clay,  mixed  with  water,   which   is  smeared   on them  in  coarse  patterns.
2nd. — White  clay,  which  is  delicately  touched  on  in  fine  patterns resembling  those  of  the  South  Andaman  tattooing.
46  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
3rcl. — Red  ochre  mixed  with  turtle,  pig,  or  almond  oil,    which   is smeared  over  the  body  coarsely.
The  Ong6  Group  of  Tribes  use  a  yellowish  clay  mixed  with  water to  smear  very  coarsely  over  their  bodies,  and  put  the  oily  red  pigment on  their  hair  only.
The  Andamanese  recognise  divisions  of  the  day  by  the  position  of the  sun,  and  have  rough  divisions  for  the  night.  The  year  is  divided into  three  main  seasons,  and  several  smaller  divisions  known  by  the flowering  of  certain  trees.  The  phenomena  of  the  tides  they  are  ac- quainted with  and  note  carefully.
A  rude  sort  of  barter  exists  amongst  them,  and  articles  are  ex- changed among  Tribes  of  the  same  Group,  by  which  one  Tribe  obtains from  another  articles  which  are  not  manufactured,  or  do  not  existj in  the  country  of  the  former.
They  have  no  idea  of  agriculture,  nor,  until  our  advent,  did  they attempt  to  tame  or  train  any  animals  or  birds.
Sport  with  an  Andamanese  is  the  mainspring  of  his  life,  and  he not  only  kills  to  eat,  but  also  from  sheer  delight  of  the  chase.  Their weapons  are,  harpoons  for  turtle  (which  are  never  turned),  and du gong,  and  such  large  fishes  as  porpoises  ;  bow  and  arrows  for  all else.  There  are  two  kinds  of  arrows,  one  very  long  one  with  a straight  head,  pointed  and  barbed,  for  ordinary  shooting  ;  and  a  pecu- liar shorter  arrow  with  a  detachable  head  having  a  broad  heavily barbed  blade,  for  pig  shooting.
The  harpoon  is  not  known  to  the  Ong6  Group  of  Tribes,  and  each Group  has  an  entirely  different  shape  of  bow.  There  is  a  common resemblance  between  all  the  arrows.  The  Onge"  Group,  and  occa- sionally the  North  Andaman  Group,  use  arrows  with  two,  three and  four  heads.  The  Andamanese  are  good  shots  at  short  distances only,  and  in  the  dense  jungle  it  is  impossible  to  distinguisli  game  afar. They  judge  direction  fairly  well,  but  cannot  allow  for  distance.
The  way  in  which  they  shoot  fish  darting  about  in  the  surf  (they have  no  hooks  or  lines)  is  really  wonderful,  and  defies  imitation.
WITH  THE  ASDAMANESE.
The  Great  Andaman  Tribes  make  a  large  net  into  which  they  drive turtle  and  so  catch  them  unwounded.
Canoes,  etc. — Two  varieties  are  used,  the  oldest  form  having  an  out- rigger, and  a  huge  modern  form  found  in  the  South  Andaman  Group only,  without  an  outrigger.  These  are  hollowed  from  a  single  log  of some  light  soft  wood,  by  adze  cuts  only,  and  without  the  use  of  fire. They  do  not  last  long,  and  are  far  from  being  good  sea  boats.
They  have  two  modes  of  propelling  these  canoes  ;  one,  by  paddling with  small  paddles  like  children's  wooden  spades,  which  mode  is  used in  deep  water  ;  and  the  other,  by  poling,  which  is  used  in  shallow water.  Owing  to  their  buoyancy  and  very  light  draught  these  canoes can,  under  such  an  impetus  to  the  oarsmen  as  fear,  or  the  excitement of  the  chase,  "be  made  to  travel  for  a  short  distance  at  a  considerable speed.  They  are  able  indeed  to  outstrip  the  boats  ordinarily  supplied to  merchant  vessels,  which  are  designed  for  safety  in  a  heavy  sea,  and not  for  speed.  The  Andamanese  do  not  venture  far  from  land,  and would  certainly  never  go  out  of  sight  of  land.  We  must  dismiss  as  un- tenable the  stories  of  the  raids  that  the  Andamanese  are  said  to  have made  in  their  canoes  on  the  Car  Nicobar.  The  islands  are  over  80 miles  apart  at  the  nearest  point,  and  are  very  low.  The  Andamanese having  no  idea  of  steering  by  compass  or  stars,  and  no  method  of storing  water  for  such  a  voyage,  would  never  attempt  it,  even  if  they knew  of  the  existence  and  approximate  direction  of  the  Car  Nicobar, which  is  doubtful.  They  have  not  even  attempted  to  go  from  Land- fall Island  to  the  Coco  Islands,  where  the  distance  to  be  crossed  is only  30  miles.
They  cook  their  food,  eating  nothing  raw  (though  often  rare), and  make  cooking  pots  slightly  differing  in  shape  among  the  different Groups  of  Tribes  by  having  pointed  or  rounded  bottoms.  The  special clay  from  which  these  are  made  is  only  found  in  certain  parts  of  the islands,  and  the  pots  in  consequence  form  an  important  article  of barter.  They  are  moulded  by  hand,  sun-dried,  and  half-baked  in  the fire.  The  slightest  ornamentation  in  the  form  of  wavy  lines  is attempted.  They  are  not  glazed.
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
Iron  has  only  been  in  use  since  it  has  heen  obtainable  from  wrecks, shells  and  fish  bones  being  used  instead.  Neatly  formed  baskets  are made  differing  in  shape  among  the  different  Groups  of  Tribes,  also buckets  of  wood  and  bamboo.
String  is  obtained  from  the  inner  bark  of  certain  creeping  shrubs, and  a  stout  cord  is  made  from  the  inner  bark  of  the  tree  "  Melochia Velutina."  Most  of  their  weapons  and  utensils  are  coarse  and  rude, and  stone  implements  are  not  used  (except  the  flakes  of  quartz  for shaving  with).  A  small  adze  is  the  principal  cutting  instrument,  and a  valve  of  the  Cyrena  shell  is  used  as  a  knife.  Rather  neat  sleeping mats,  made  from  strips  of  cane  bark,  are  used  ;  and  the  two  articles of  principal  note  among  the  ornaments  are  the  fringes  of  the  shell, Dentalium  Octogonum,  and  the  handsome  wreaths  used  by  the  Onge' Group  of  Tribes,  ornamented  with  the  straw-coloured,  roasted,  bark of  a  species  of  Dendrobium.  Skulls,  jawbones,  and  necklaces  of human  and  other  bones,  and  shells,  are  worn.
Amusements.  —  Though  the  youths  have  many  simple  games  at which  they  play,  the  main  object  of  Andamanese  life,  next  to  sport, is  the  dance.  This  takes  place  every  evening  when  a  few  people  are gathered  together,  and  continues  for  hours  ;  and  occasionally  they have  special  meetings  of  Tribes  or  Septs  for  dances  which  assume  a ceremonial  form  and  last  for  days.
The  music  is  vocal  only,  accompanied  by  a  dull  rhythmical  beat on  a  hollow  wooden  drum,  and  the  clapping  of  hands,  and  is  very monotonous,  the  compass  of  the  song  being  only  about  four  semitones with  the  intermediate  quarter-tones.  There  are  five  varieties  of dances  among  the  different  tribes,  and  they  are  peculiar  and  not  easily described,  except  at  greater  length  than  can  be  permitted  here.
Years  of  intercourse  with  the  Andamanese  have  taught  us  that civilisation  can  give  them  nothing  to  compensate  for  the  life  in  their own  jungle,  and,  however  kindly  and  well  treated  they  may  be,  they are  always  ready  to  leave  the  Settlement  with  its  comforts  (and,  to them,  luxuries),  for  their  wild  jungle  life,  its  sport,  food,  and  amuse- ments. If  we  are  asked  whv  fhs  Andamanese  have  not  been  more
WITH  THE  ANDAMANEPE.  49
civilised,  the  answer  is  that  civilisation  cannot  be  forced  on  a  race  ; a  want  must  be  created  before  it  can  be  gratified;  and  to  attempt, as  at  one  time  was  done,  to  force  a  nomadic  hunting  race  to  become agriculturists,  when  the  labour  of  agriculture  is  irksome,  takes  the people  from  the  pursuits  they  like,  and  does  not  supply  any  want  that they  feel,  is  both  absurd  and  impolitic-,  as  liable  to  estrange  them when  their  friendship  is  for  many  reasons  important.
It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  object  of  the  Government  of India  in  establishing  friendly  relations  with  the  Andamanese  is two-fold  : —
1st  — For  the  general  good,  in  order  that  the  crews  of  ship- wrecked vessels  may  be  well-treated,  and  assisted  to  the Settlement  of  Port  Blair.
2nd. — For  the  individual  good  of  that  Settlement,  in  order   that the  aborigines  may  cease  from  fighting  with  the  settlers, and  impeding  progress,  and   that   they    may   act   as   a jungle  police  in  recapturing  escaped  convicts. The  following  pages  will  show   that   this    has   been   satisfactorily done,  and  the   above  description   of  the  savages  will  give  the   reader some  idea  of  the  difficulties  which  were  met  with  in  doing  it.
A  HISTORY  OP  OUU  RELATIONS
CHAPTER  III.
Early  accounts  of  the  Andamanese — Claudius  Ptolemy — Renaudot,  and  Arab  notes — The  Travels  of  Two  Mohammedans  through  India  and  China — Pemberton — Harris's Collection  of  Voyages  and  Travels— Marco  Polo — Colonel  Yule — Friar  Odoric — Nicolo  Conti — Dr.  Anderson — Dr.  Careri — Cesare  Federici — Hamilton — Establish- ment of  the  Settlement  in  1789— Lieutenant  Colebrooke's  Journal — Lieutenant Colebrooke's  Monograph  on  the  Andamanese — Notes  on  the  Monograph.
TEAT  the  existence  of  a  ohain  of  Islands  from  Cape  Negrais  to Sumatra  was  known  in  the  2nd  century,  is  shown  by  Claudius  Pto- lemy's writings,  and  the  maps  made  from  those  writings,  in  which  the Island  of  "  Buzacata  "  is  laid  down ;  but  we  cannot  determine  whether this  name  was  intended  to  apply  to  the  Andaman  Group,  and  we  have no  information  regarding  it  other  than  that  "  it  produces  quantities of  shells,  and  the  inhabitants  go  naked  and  are  called  Agmatse."
The  so-called  maps  of  Ptolemy  show  also  in  the  same  sea  an "Island  of  Cannibals,"  called  "The  Island  of  Good  Fortune," 'A-yaOov  Sai/ioi/os.  It  is  worthy  of  note  thab  Ptolemy  never  drew any  maps  himself  :  those  to  be  found  in  the  oldest  editions  of  his work  are  by  Agathodaemon  (a  mathematician  of  the  5th  (?)  century after  Christ),  though  accurately  based,  it  is  true,  on  Ptolemy's  data.
The  name  of  this  cartographer  gives  rise  to  suspicions.  Ptolemy writes  of  "  Buzacata  "  only.  The  map  shows  the  "  Cannibal  Island  " of  "  'AyafloO  Satfiovos  "  for  which  name  we  have  no  authority.
May  not  the  cartographer  have  called  the  island  after  himself  ?
The  first  distinct  notice  of  the  Andamans  is  in  the  collection  of early  Arab  notes  on  India  and  China,  which  was  translated  by  Eus. Renaudot ;  this  account  was  copied  by  Pemberton  and  Harris,  and  we obtain  the  following  as  the  current  belief  at  that  time,  and  for  cen- turies later,  regarding  the  Andamanese.
(In  the  Ptolemaic  maps  up  to  1490  islands  are  shown  on  either side  of  the  Malay  Peninsula,  all  of  which  are  said  to  be  inhabited  by Anthropophagi.)
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  rjj
The  Travels  of  Two  Muhammedans  through  India  and  China, Pemberton's  General  Collection  of  Voyages  and  Travels,  London, 1811,  Vol.  7,  page  183.
"  Beyond  these  two  islands  lies  the  sea  of  Andaman  :  the  people  on this  coast  eat  human  flesh  quite  raw ;  their  complexion  is  black,  their hair  frizzled,  their  countenance  and  eyes  frightful,  their  feet  are  very large,  and  almost  a  cubit  in  length,  and  they  go  quite  naked.  They have  no  sort  of  barks  or  other  vessels  ;  if  they  had,  they  would  seize and  devour  all  the  passengers  they  could  lay  hands  on.  When  ships have  been  kept  back  by  contrary  winds,  they  are  often  in  these  seas obliged  to  drop  anchor  on  this  barbarous  coast  for  the  sake  of  water, when  they  have  expended  their  stock ;  and  upon  these  occasions  they commonly  lose  some  of  their  men."
It  is  evident  that  these  travellers  did  not  themselves  visit  the Andamans,  and  their  account  is  borrowed  from  the  tales  current  in  the neighbouring  countries  at  the  time.  The  Andamanese  probably  posses- sed canoes  long  prior  to  the  period  referred  to.  It  should  be  remem- bered that  it  was  to  the  interest  of  the  pirates  who  made  the  Andamans a  head- quarters  for  their  raids,  and  also  slaved  the  aborigines,  to  exag- gerate the  real  dangers  they  encountered,  and  spread  such  tales  regard- ing the  Andamans  as  would  keep  others  away.
In  Harris's  Collection  of  Voyages  and  Travels  we  find,  after  the above  description  of  the  Andamans,  the  following  : —
"  Beyond  this  is  a  mountainous  but  uninhabited  Island  where  it is  said  there  are  mines  of  silver ;  but,  as  it  does  not  lie  in  the  usual track  of  shipping,  many  have  sought  for  it  in  vain,  though  it  is  re- markable for  a  mountain  called  Kashenal.  It  once  so  happened  that a  ship  sailing  in  this  latitude  had  sight  of  the  mountain  and  shaped her  course  for  it,  and  falling  in  with  the  land,  sent  a  boat  on  shore with  hands  to  cut  wood.  The  men  kindled  a  fire  and  saw  silver  run from  it  which  plainly  indicated  there  was  a  mine  of  this  metal  in that  place ;  they  shipped,  therefore,  as  much  of  the  earth  or  ore  as  they thought  fit,  but  as  they  were  proceeding  on  their  voyage,  they  met
with  such  a  storm  that,   to  lighten  the  ship,  they  were  under  the
•  I
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
necessity  of  throwing  all  the  ore   overboard.     Since  that  time,   the mountain  has  been   carefully  sought  for,   but  has   never   again  been
seen.'1
Possibly  some  island  in  the  Nicobar  group  is  here  referred  to. The  name  of  the  mountain  resembles  that  of  the  island  of  "  Katchall," and,  as  will  be  seen  presently  in  the  extract  from  Hamilton's  Voyages, quicksilver  is  said  to  have  be^n  found  in  these  parts.  In  those  days  the Andamans  and  Nicobars  seem  to  have  been  hopelessly  mixed  together, and  in  the  rocks  of  the  Andamans  there  is  nothing  to  lead  us  to  sup- pose that  either  silver  or  quicksilver  will  be  found.
Marco  Polo  passed  by  the  Andamans  in  1290,  and  writes  : — ''  Angamanaia  is  a  very  long  island.  The  people  are  without  a king,  and  are  idolaters,  and  no  better  than  wild  beasts.  And  I assure  you  all  tha  men  of  this  island  of  Angamanain  have  heads like  dogs,  and  teeth  and  eyes  likewise  ;  in  fact,  in  the  face  they  are just  like  big  mastiff  dogs.  They  have  a  quantity  of  spices  :  but  they are  a  most  cruel  generation,  and  eat  everybody  that  they  can  catch, if  not  of  their  own  race.  They  lire  on  flesh  and  rice  and  milk,  and have  fruits  different  from  any  of  ours."
The  whole  account  is  evidently  from  hearsay,  being  utterly  incor- rect and  absurd.  Such  accounts  are  the  basis  of  most  of  oar  informa- tion regarding  the  Andamans  till  recent  times.  Colonel  Yule,  in  his "  Marco  I'olo  "  writes  :
"  Abraham  Rogers  tells  us  that  the  Coromandel  Bi-ahmins  used  to say  that  the  Rakshasas  or  demons  had  their  abode  '  on  the  island  of Andaman,  lying  on  the  route  from  Pulicat  to  Pegu,'  and  also  that they  were  man-eaters.  This  would  be  very  curious  if  it  were  a  genuine old  Brahminical  Saga  ;  but  I  fear  it  may  have  been  gathered  from  the Arab  Seamen.  Still,  it  is  remarkable  that  a  strange,  weird-looking island,  which  rises,  covered  with  forest,  a  steep  and  regular  volcanic cone,  straight  out  of  the  deep  sea  to  the  eastward  of  the  Andaman group,  bears  the  name  of  ISarkandam  in  which  one  cannot  but  recog- nise '  Nanik'  '  Hell.'  Can  it  be  that,  in  old  times,  but  still  content porary  with  Hindu  navigation,  this  volcano  was  active,  and  that  some
WITH  THE  ANDAMANKSE.
53
Brahmin  Saint  Brandon  recognised  in  it  the  mouth  of  Hell,  congenial to  the  Rakshasas  of  the  adjacent  group  ?  "
In  the  above,  Colonel  Yule  was  misled  by  the  general  idea  that Narcondam  was  a  volcanic  cone,  and  had  been  an  active  volcano.  His note  is,  however,  of  importance  as  showing  that  the  Andamans  were  on a  trade  route,  and  therefore  a  convenient  rendezvous  for  pirates  who wished  to  prey  on  the  trade;  also,  that  the  existence  of  the  aborigines and  their  hostility  to  all  comers  was  even  then  well-known.
Friar  Odoric  passed  the  Andamans  in  about  1322,  and  mixes  up all  the  tales  of  the  Andamanese,  Nicobarese,  and  the  cannibal  Battas of  Sumatra,  calling  the  people  dog-faced,  cannibals,  also  traders,  etc. ; he  did  not  touch  at  the  islands.
It  is  probable  that  the  foroaious  cannibalism  of  the  Battas  of  Sum- atra was  then  known,  and  the  Andamanese  being  so  hostile  to  all  stran- gers, and  having  the  custom  in  certain  parts  of  burning  the  bodies  of their  dead  enemies,  they  were  called  cannibals  too.
Nicolo  Conti  (circa  1440)  mentions  the  Andaman  Tslnnls.  He calls  them  "  Andamania,"  which  he  explains  to  mean  the  "Island  of Gold,"  and  gives  their  circumference  at  800  miles.  He  speaks  of  a  lake with  peculiar  virtues  existing  on  the  islands,  says  the  inhabitants  are cannibals,  and  adds  that  no  travellers  touch  here  unless  driven  to  do so  by  bad  weather ;  for,  when  taken,  they  are  torn  to  pieces  and devoured  by  these  cruel  savages.
No  gold  has  yet  been  found  on  the  Andamans,  nor  is  there  any  rea- son to  suppose  that  it  will  be  found.  No  such  lake  exists,  though  the story  has  found  credence  in  our  own  time,  because  the  Andamanese speak  of  lakes  in  the  interior.  These,  being  investigated,  are  found  to be  the  smallest  swampy  pools.
With  reference  to  the  tale  in  Harris's  Voyages,  and  the  statement of  Nicolo  Conti,  Dr.  J,  Anderson  observes:
"  This  myth  expired  very  slowly,  and  existed  down  to  the  end  of the  17th  century.  Dr.  Careri's  (Giro  del  Mondo,  t.  Ill,  page  290) notice  of  it  is  among  the  last,  but  he  gives  the  English  the  credit  of having  originated  it,  but  when,  he  does  not  say.
54
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
"  The  story  related  by  him  was,  that  an  English  ship  having  been driven  to  take  shelter  from  a  storm,  not  at  the  Andamans,  but  at  the Nicobars,  to  the  south  of  them,  a  native,  who  had  taken  some  fresh water  on  board  the  ship,  spilt  some  on  the  anchor,  the  iron  of  which was  turned  into  gold  wherever  the  water  had  touched  it.  The  crew after  they  had  learnt  from  the  native  that  the  water  came  from  a  well in  the  island,  killed  him  1
"  This  report  of  the  gold-producing  quality  of  the  water,  Gemilli Careri  says,  he  had  been  told  on  high  authority,  had  led  the  Dutch  to appropriate  the  Nicobars  towards  the  end  of  the  17th  century."
Such  legends  led  to  Dr.  Heifer's  unfortunate  expedition  to  the Andamans  in  1839.
Cesare  Federici,  in  1569,  mentions  the  ferocity  of  the  Andamanese, and  the  following  extract  is  given  from  Hamilton's  account  of  the  East Indies.  (Pinkerton's  Vol.  VIII,  pages  430,  431.)
"  The  Islands  opposite  to  the  coast  of  Tenasserim  are  the  Anda- mans. They  lie  about  eighty  leagues  off,  and  are  surrounded  by  many dangerous  bauks  and  rocks;  they  are  all  inhabited  with  cannibals, who  are  so  fearless,  that  they  will  swim  off  to  a  boat  if  she  approach near  the  shore,  and  attack  her  with  their  wooden  weapons,  notwith- standing the  superiority  of  numbers  in  the  boat,  and  the  advantages  of missive  arms  of  iron,  steel,  and  fire.
"I  knew  one  Fergusson,  who  commanded  a  ship  from  Fort  St. George,  bound  from  Malacca  to  Bengal  in  company  with  another  ship, going  too  near  one  of  the  A  ndaman  Islands,  was  driven,  by  the  force of  a  strong  current,  on  some  rocks,  and  the  ship  lost.  The  other  ship was  driven  through  a  channel  between  two  of  the  same  islands,  and was  not  able  to  assist  the  shipwrecked  men,  but  neither  Fergusson  nor any  of  his  people  were  ever  more  heard  of,  which  gave  ground  to  con- jecture that  they  were  all  devoured  by  those  savage  cannibals.
"I  saw  one  of  the  natives  of  those  islands  at  Atcheen,  in  anno  169 1. He  was  then  about  forty  years  of  age.  The  Andamaners  had  a  yearly custom  to  come  to  the  Nicobar  Islands,  with  a  great  number  of  small praws,  and  kill  or  take  prisoners  as  many  of  the  poor  Nicobariana  as
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  55
they  could  overcome.  The  Nicobarians  again  joined  their  forces,  and gave  the  cannibals  battle,  when  they  met  with  them,  and  one  time defeated  them,  and  gave  no  quarter  to  the  Andamaners.  This  man above  mentioned,  when  a  boy  of  ten  or  twelve  years  of  ag<j,  accom- panied his  father  in  the  wars,  and  was  taken  prisoner,  and  his  youth recommending  him  to  mercy,  they  saved  his  life,  and  made  him  a slave.  After  he  continued  so  three  or  four  years,  he  was  carried  to Atcheen  to  be  sold  for  cloth,  knives,  and  tobacco,  which  are  the  com- modities most  wanting  on  the  Nicobars.  The  Atchoeners  being  Moham- medans, this  boy's  patron  bred  him  up  in  that  religion,  and  some  years after,  his  master  dying  gave  him  his  freedom ;  he  having  a  great  desire to  see  his  native  country,  took  a  praw,  and  the  months  of  December, January,  and  February,  being  fair  weather,  and  the  sea  smooth,  he ventured  to  the  sea,  in  order  to  go  to  his  own  country,  from  the  Islands of  Gomas  and  Pulley  wey,  which  lie  near  Atcheen.  Here  the  southern- most of  the  Nicobars  may  be  seen,  and  so  one  island  may  be  seen  from another  from  the  southernmost  of  those  to  Chetty-Andaman,  which  is the  southernmost  of  the  Andamans,  which  are  distant  from  Atcheen about  an  hundred  leagues.  Arriving  among  his  relations,  he  was  made welcome,  with  great  demonstrations  of  joy  to  see  him  alive,  whom they  expected  to  have  been  long  dead.
"  Having  retained  his  native  language,  he  gave  them  an  account  of his  adventures ;  and,  as  the  Andamaners  have  no  notion  of  Deity,  he acquainted  them  with  the  knowledge  he  had  of  a  God,  and  would  have persuaded  his  countrymen  to  learn  of  him  the  way  to  adore  God,  and to  obey  his  laws,  but  he  could  make  no  converts.  When  he  had  stayed a  month  or  two,  he  took  leave  to  be  gone  again,  which  they  permitted, on  condition  that  he  would  return.  He  brought  along  with  him  four or  five  hundredweight  of  quicksilver,  and  he  said  that  some  of  the Andaman  Islands  abound  in  that  commodity.  He  had  made  several voyages  thither  before  I  saw  him.,  and  always  brought  some  quick- silver along  with  him.  Some  Mohammedan  Fakirs  would  fain  have accompanied  him  in  his  voyages,  but  he  would  never  suffer  them, because,  he  said,  he  could  not  engage  for  their  safety  among  his countrymen.  When  I  saw  him  he  was  in  company  with  a  Seid,  whom
56  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATION'S
I  carried  a  passenger  to  Surat,  and  from  whom  I  had  this  account  of his  adventures."
The  origin  for  such  an  extraordinary  fable  it  is  difficult  to  give. As  we  know  well,  the  Andarnanese  are  not,  and  never  have  been, cannibals,  and  their  canoes  and  habits,  as  well  as  their  intellects,  are such  as  to  put  any  idea  of  such  voyaging  out  of  the  question.  No  man could  cross  the  Ten  Degree  Channel  with  a  load  of  quicksilver,  in  an Andamanese  canoe,  except  by  the  merest  chance.  Prom  my  personal experience  with  "  travelled  "  Andamanese  I  am  aware  that,  given  the necessary  ideas,  they  are  quite  capable  of  inventing  such  a  fable  ;  but> from  the  fact  that  Mr.  Man  assures  me  that  the  tradition  still  exists on  the  Car  Nicobar,  that  raids  were  made  there  by  the  Andamanese, who  are  fairly  accurately  described,  I  should  suppose  that  Malay  pi- rates with  Andamanese  slaves  on  board  have  raided,  and  enslaved,  the Nicobarese  also.
The  story  would  seem  to  have  filtered  through  several  people,  and the  quicksilver  part,  and  travelling  from  Atcheen,  can  only  refer,  if  it be  true  at  all,  to  the  Nicobars.  It  appears  as  if  the  present  was  the  out- come of  many  stories  mixed  together,  in  which  the  Andaman  and  Nioo- bar  Islands,  and  their  very  different  inhabitants  are  confused,  and  the few  facts  there  may  be  in  it,  have  been  overlaid  with  a  great  deal  of invention.
Colonel  Cadell,  who  was  for  twelve  years  Chief  Commissioner  of the  Andaman  and  Nicobar  Islands,  characterised  the  story  to  me,  as "  the  lying  invention  of  an  Arab  Sheikh,  who  did  not  want  the  truth known  about  the  slave  he  had  kidnapped."
In  1788-89  the  Government  of  Bengal  sought  to  establish  in  the Andaman  Islands  a  penal  colony  associated  with  a  harbour  of  refuge. Lieutenant  Colebrooke  of  the  Bengal  Engineers,  and  Lieutenant  Archi- bald Blair  of  the  Indian  Navy,  were  sent  to  survey  and  report.  The result  of  their  report  was  that  a  Settlement  was  established  by  Lieu- tenant Blair,  in  September,  1789,  on  Chatham  Island,  on  the  south- east bay  of  the  Great  Andaman,  now  called  Port  Blair,  but  then  called Port  Cornwallis.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANK>K.
57
To  us,  who  followed  in  the  footsteps  of  the^e  officers  at  an  interval of  over  60  years,  and  with  greatly  improve  I  means  of  communication with  Ind'm,  and  far  superior  appliances  for  forming  a  Settlement,  it has  always  boon  a  matter  of  admiration  to  notice  how  carefully  their work  was  done,  and  how  simply  and  yet  how  absolutely  correctly  their notes  were  recorded.  That  botli  officers  were  men  of  first  class  ability, there  can  be  no  doubt ;  and  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  so  few  records  of their  work  in  the  Andamans  can  now  be  found.
Extracts  from  Lieutenant  Colebrooke's  Journal  of  a  voyage  to  the Andaman  Islands  (1789-90.)
20th  December,  1789. — We  sailed  from  Diamond  Island  at  about 11  o'clock.
21st  December. — At  daybreak  this  morning  we  found  ourselves (in  the  Atdln-nto)  about  three  leagues  to  the  westward  of  Preparis Id.  At  about  11  o'clock  the  man  at  the  masthead  discovered  the Cocos  Ids.  ahead.  In  the  evening  we  had  passed  the  Cocos,  and  were in  sight  of  Narconclam,  about  20  leagues,  E.  8.  E.
22nd  December. — In  the  morning  we  saw  the  Saddle  Mountain upon  the  Great  Andaman  Id.  We  steered  south  during  the  whole day  and  passed  the  cluster  of  Ids.  called  Archipelago,  an  the  East side  of  the  Great  Island.  They  are  all  covered  with  wood,  and  some are  surrounded  by  rocky  cliffs.  About  6  P.M.  we  weathered  the  south- ernmost of  these  islands  and  bore  away  West  by  South  for  Port  Corn- wallis  ;  *  but  night  coming  on,  the  Captain  thought  it  best  to  lay  to  for the  night,  and  not  to  run  into  a  strange  harbour  in  the  dark.
23rd  December — About  four  in  the  morning  we  made  sail  and entered  the  Harbour  called  Port  Cornwallis  at  about  8  o'clock.  Here we  found  the  Perseverance  and  Ariel  at  anchor  ;  likewise  the  Hunger and  Viper,  which  last  vessel  had  overtaken  us  and  run  in  during  the night.
•  Tl.is,,U  musi  be  remembiTet',  is  the  modern  Pott  Blair.
53  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
2lth  December. — Captain  D   and  myself  went  up  the  Harbour
in  a  boat  to  the  distance  of  about  3  miles.  We  saw  upon  a  rocky point  about  twenty  or  thirty  of  the  natives  :  they  appeared  to  be  quite naked  and  besmeared  with  mud.
25th  December. —Went  on  shore  upon  Chatham  Id.  to  take views.  This  is  a  very  small  Id.  near  the  entrance  of  the  Harbour where  Mr.  Blair,  the  Marine  Surveyor,  has  lately  erected  a  small  house with  wood  and  canvas.  He  has  already  cleared  away  a  great  deal  of the  wood  on  the  Id ,  and  planted  a  small  garden.
•26th  December. — Went  in  company  with  Commodore  Cornwallis up  the  Harbour.  We  had  in  the  barge  one  of  the  natives,  who  some time  ago  had  been  taken  in  a  skirmish  by  the  people  of  the  Viper, He  had  the  mark  of  a  pistol  ball  which  had  gone  through  his  nose,  and put  out  one  of  his  eyes.  He  appeared  to  be  very  cheerful,  and  quite reconciled  to  his  captivity.  It  appears  that  when  the  Banger  and Viper  Brigs  first  entered  this  Harbour  the  natives  were  extremely hostile  :  they  attacked  the  boats  which  went  ashore  for  water,  and  even ventured  to  approach  the  vessels  and  discharged  their  arrows  at  them. One  of  the  crew  had  an  arrow  shot  through  his  shoulder,  and  prob- ably some  would  have  lost  their  lives,  had  not  the  timely  discharge  of two  or  three  muskets  put  a  stop  to  their  attack.  In  one  of  these  skir- mishes a  native  was  unfortunately  killed,  upon  which  the  rest  ran  off, making  the  most  doleful  lamentations.
o
We  sailed  up  to  the  furthest  extremity  of  the  Harbour  about  five or  sis  miles  and  entered  a  creek  which  had  the  appearance  of  a  river; but  when  we  had  rowed  up  about  two  miles  through  mangroves  and thickets,  and  not  finding  the  water  in  the  least  sweeter,  we  concluded that  it  was  only  a  salt  creek,  which  probably  terminated  a  little  further. The  shores  on  each  side  were  lined  with  mangroves,  except  in  two  or three  places,  where  the  ground  was  high  and  covered  with  trees.
We  went  ashore  to  look  at  a  hut  which  appeared  to  be  inhabited, but  we  found  it  deserted.  It  was  a  most  wretched  little  shed,  built  of sticks  and  leaves.  We  found  in  it  some  bones,  which  appeared  to  be those  of  a  wild  hog,  suspended  to  the  roof  by  strings.  The  ground about  the  hut  \vas  strewed  with  the  shells  of  oysters,  mussels,  cockles,
WITH  THE  ANDAMANE3E.  59
and  other  shell-fish.  In  returning  down  the  creek,  we  discovered  one of  the  natives  in  a  tree.  The  instant  he  perceived  us  he  ran  down with  as  much  agility  as  a  monkey,  making  a  groat  noise,  and  calling  to two  others  who  were  helow.  One  of  them  we  took  to  he  a  woman,  by her  voice,  as  we  could  not  see  her.  The  Commodore  threw  ashore  two or  three  cocoa-nuts  as  a  token  of  friendship,  but  the  boat  being  very near  the  shore  they  did  not  venture  at  first  to  pick  them  up.  We  rowed away  a  little,  and  one  of  them  came  slowly  towards  the  cocoa-nuts  til], being  near  enough,  he  snatched  them  up  eagerly  and  ran  off.  It  ap- pears that  cocoa-nuts  do  not  grow  here,  at  least  we  have  not  yet  dis- covered any.  Those  which  were  given  to  the  natives  were  brought  by the  Hanger  from  the  Nicobars.  We  dined  on  our  return  upon  a small  hill  which  had  been  called  Mount  Pleasant.  It  commands  an extensive  view  of  the  harbour  and  the  country  around.  In  the  after- noon we  returned  towards  the  ship,  but  seeing  one  of  the  natives  on shore  we  stopped  a  few  minutes  to  hold  a  conference  with  him.  He was  a  man  of  the  middle  size  and  tolerably  well  shaped.  His  wool  was rubbed  with  a  kind  of  red  earth,  and  the  rest  of  his  body  smeared  with mud.  He  wore  round  Ms  neck  and  left  arm  a  kind  of  ornament  which looked  like  a  fringe  of  dded  grass.  He  appeared  very  cautious  of  ap- proaching us  ;  probably-,  for  fear  of  being  seized  ;  however,  he  allowed
Mr.  K   to  draw  near  him,  and  readily  exchanged  his  bow  and
arrows  for  a  knife  which  was  presented  to  him.  He  had  under  his  arm a  small  basket  into  which  he  deposited  everything  that  was  given  to him.  We  gave  him  some  handfulls  of  biscuit'  and,  on  rowing  away, we  saw  him  sit  down  on  the  rock  and  eat  of  it  with  great  avidity.
27th  December. — This  morning  the  "Ranger  Snow  sailed  for Bengal.  She  was  sent  with  despatches  by  Commodore  Corn \vallis  to the  Governor-General  of  Bengal.  A  native  who  had  been  on  board  of this  vessel  about  three  weeks,  and  who  appeared  to  be  perfectly  recon- ciled and  pleased  with  his  new  mode  of  living}  was  left  on  board  of our  ship.  At  the  same  time  the  Commodore  gave  orders  that  if  he wished  to  go  on  shore  and  return  to  his  countrymen  an  opportunity should  be  given  him  to  desert;  he  was  accordingly  put  into  a  boat  and sent  ashore.  There  happened  to  be  at  this  time  a  few  of  the  natives
i2
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
in  sight,  and  we  desired  him  to  go  and  join  them.  He  seemed  to  be actuated  by  a  sudden  impulse  of  joy  at  seeing  them.  He  sprung  out of  the  boat  and  flung  down  his  hat  and  ran  towards  them.  They  did not  immediately  recognise  him  for  one  of  their  countrymen,  as  he  had been  clothed  on  board  the  Hanger  with  a  jacket  and  trousers.  He soon  disencumbered  himself  from  his  clothes,  and  returned  to  that state  of  nature  which  he  had  from  his  infancy  been  accustomed  to. They  immediately  seemed  to  congratulate  him  upon  his  safe  escape, and  they  all  together  ran  into  the  woods.
28th  December. — Nothing  material  occurred  this  morning.  In the  afternoon  the  Commodore,  etc.,  rowed  toward  the  rocky  point,  and held  a  conference  with  the  same  native  whom  we  visited  on  the  26th. He  was  sitting  upon  the  rocks  with  a  fare,  at  which  he  had  been  roast- ing some  shell-fish.  He  was  attended  by  a  woman  and  girl,  both  per- fectly naked  and  their  skins  daubed  with  mud.
29th  December. — This  morning  the  natives  showed  an  inclination to  be  very  hostile  and  mischievous.  The  Commodore  had  an  interview with  several  of  them  in  a  little  Bay  on  the  Eastern  side  of  the  Harbour. They  appeared  at  first  perfectly  good-humoured.  Presently  a  man armed  with  a  bow  came  down  from  the  wood  apparently  very  much enraged  ;  he  made  a  great  noise  and  harangued  them,  as  if  to  spur  tnem on  to  an  attack.  He  discharged  an  arrow  himself,  and  his  example was  immediately  followed  by  all  the  rest ;  above  fifty  arrows  flew  over the  boat  and  one  went  through  the  awning.  Our  people  fired  a  musket over  their  heads.  Luckily  no  person  in  the  boat  was  hurt,  and  the Commodore,  not  wishing  to  take  advantage  of  the  superior  efficacy  of our  muskets,  prevented  our  men  from  firing  at  them  and  rowed  away. Some  people  from  the  Ariel  were  also  attacked  near  their  watering place,  and  seeing  themselves  closely  pressed,  were  obliged  to  discharge two  or  three  muskets,  by  which  one  of  the  natives  was  killed  on the  spot.  We  dined  upon  Mount  Pleasant  and  rowed  towards the  rocky  point  after  dinner.  Here  we  found  about  twenty  of  the natives  assembled.  Some  drew  back  into  the  woods  with  their  bows and  arrows,  others  picked  up  stones  as  if  to  annoy  us.  They  showed ky  their  actions  a  great  inclination  to  be  troublesome;  but  seeing
WITH  THK  ANJUMANT.SE.
two  muskets  ready  to  fire  they  remained  quiet,  and  we  returned  to  the ships."
On  the  31st  December  Lieutenant  Colebrooke  visited  the  Nicobar Islands,  returning  to  Port  Cornwallis  on  the  21st  February,  1790.
He  notes  of  the  Cinque  Islands  that  they  are  high  apd  rocky, covered  with  trees  and  brush-wood,  do  not  appear  to  be  inhabited,  and some  of  them  appear  to  be  hardly  accessible.
On  the  19th  March,  17CO,  he  sdled  up  the  islands,  visiting  Shoal Bay,  Oyster  Bay,  where  he  notes  the  quantity  of  good  oysters,  and Port  Meadows.  He  ctills  this  a  most  capacious  and  noble  harbour.
"  The  shores  of  it  are  mostly  lined  with  mangroves,  and  the  land is  much  lower  than  the  country  about  Port  Cornwallis,  and  might  prob- ably be  much  sooner  brought  to  a  state  of  cultivation.  At  the  mouth of  this  Bay  is  a  very  pleasant  looking  Id.,  and  the  channel  on  each side  seems  to  be  perfectly  navigable.  We  saw  a  canoe  with  four  or five  of  the  natives  cross  over  from  the  small  island  to  the  main,  and  in the  afternoon  we  found  upon  the  former  a  hut,  which  appeared  to  have been  recently  deserted,
23rd  March.  —  This  morning  we  made  a  survey  oc  the  Harbour, by  taking  bearings  and  angles  in  different  directions  and  calculating distances  by  sound  from  the  report  of  guns  and  muskets.  "We  rowed out  in  our  small  boat  to  a  rocky  point  at  the  Northern  Entrance  of  the Harbour.  Here  we  stayed  about  an  hour  to  make  our  observations and  take  views.  We  saw  three  canoes  with  about  twenty  of  the  natives coming  round  a  point  to  the  Northward,  probably  with  an  intention to  attack  us.  This  induced  us  to  abandon  the  rock,  and  we  got  into our  boat.  We  fired  two  muskets  in  the  air  for  a  signal  of  sound.  This appeared  to  alarm  the  natives,  for  they  began  rowing  back  immediately. Great  numbers  of  sharks  were  swimming  about,  which  appeared  to  be very  ravenous.  (On  the  24th  March,  the  Middle  Strait  was  examined.)
<J6th  March.  —  This  morning  we  stood  over  to  the  Ids.  called Archipelago,  about  seven  or  eight  miles  to  the  Eastward  of  the  main Id.  We  had  been  informed  that  there  was  a  tolerable  Harbour among  them.  About  11  o'clock  we  got  into  this  supposed  harbour, but  found  that  it  was  totally  unfit  for  the  purpose.  Wo  saw  here  two
62  A  HISTORY  OF  ODE  RELATIONS
or  three  canoes  with  some  Caffres.  They  were  busy  in  fishing  and  did not  appear  to  take  much  notice  of  us.  However,  in  passing  a  rocky point,  we  saw  distinctly  with  our  glasses  some  of  the  natives  hid  among the  stones  with  their  bows  and  arrows.  One  of  them  had  advanced into  the  water,  and  was  calling  out  to  us  as  loud  as  he  could.  Their intension  was  probably  to  allure  some  of  us  on  shore,  and  to  attack  us suddenly  if  we  landed.
(27th  March. — He  rowed  up  the  passage  inside  Colebrooke  Island,* and  saw  several  of  the  natives'  huts,  and  near  to  one  there  were  some cocoa-nut  trees.
28th  March. — He  went  into  the  Bay  between  Guitar  *  and  Pass- age Islands  and  anchored.)
29th  March. — We  saw  two  huts,  and  some  of  the  natives  sitting under  them.  Also  a  canoe  with  three  men,  who  appeared  to  be  very much  alarmed  at  the  sight  of  the  vessels  and  were  paddling  away  as hard  as  they  could.
30th  March. — We  moved  this  morning  to  the  northern  part  of  the Bay.  A  party  was  sent  ashore  to  look  for  a  watering  place.  They found  at  last  a  small  well  which  had  been  dug  by  the  natives,  but  the water  was  a  little  brackish,  wbich  prevented  our  filling  the  casks.  We saw  some  huts  and  one  of  their  canoes.  In  the  former  were  found  seve- ral skulls  and  jaw  bones  of  wild  hogs,  some  of  which  were  painted  in a  chequered  manner  with  red.  They  were  strung  together  with  slips of  rattan  and  suspended  to  the  roof.  In  the  canoe  were  two  small  pad- dles shaped  like  spades.  While  the  party  was  on  shore  looking  for water  the  natives  were  observed  from  on  board  the  Ranger  watch- ing their  motions  and  probably  meditating  an  attack,  but  our  party was  sufficiently  strong  to  encounter  a  great  number  of  them,  having six  men  armed  with  muskets  and  bayonets.  There  wore  several  path- ways leading  through  the  woods.
31st  March. — About  11  o'clock  we  stood  out  of  the  Bay  with  the sea-breeze.  We  sailed  up  the  coast  about  eight  miles,  and  anchored  in the  afternoon  within  half  a  mile  of  the  shore.  Captain  K  and
•  These  names  were  not  known  then.
WITH  THE  ANDAMAXESE.  fi3
.  M   took  an  airing  in  the  boat  and  saw  a  great  number  of  the
natives.  They  shot  about  a  dozen  arrows  at  the  boat,  but  not  one  flew near  enough  to  do  any  mischief.  A  couple  of  muskets  fired  over  their heads  induced  them  to  retreat  into  the  woods.  The  arrows  were  pick- ed up  from  the  surface  of  the  water  and  brought  on  board.  We  found some  of  them  headed  with  fish  bones,  which  was  what  we  had  never observed  before.
(The  party  then  proceeded  to  Stewart's  Sound,  arriving  there  on the  2nd  April.  They  saw  a  large  shark,  which  they  judged  to  be  near 25  feet  in  length  and  above  four  feet  in  breadth  over  the  shoulders. He  was  spotted  like  a  leopard.)
3rd  April. — We  cruized  about  the  Bay  to  examine  it.  A  boat belonging  to  the  "Ranger  being  left  upon  the  spot  where  the  vessel had  anchored,  was  attacked  by  some  of  the  natives  in  their  canoes. They  came  suddenly  out  from  behind  the  mangroves  and  discharged  a great  number  of  arrows,  some  of  which  went  through  the  boat's  sail. There  were  only  two  lascars  in  the  boat,  and  they  had  no  fire-arms  ; so  that  they  were  obliged  to  retreat  as  fast  as  they  could  with  the  loss of  their  grapnel  and  twenty  fathoms  of  rope.  One  of  the  arrows  which dropped  in  the  boat  measured  five  feet  six  inches.
4th  April. — A  canoe  with  two  men  came  off  this  morning  from the  shore.  They  showed  at  first  an  inclination  to  come  on  board.  We bore  down  to  get  near  them,  but  when  we  had  got  within  two  hundred yards  of  them  they  would  approach  no  nearer,  but  kept  talking  to  us in  a  loud  and  angry  tone.  We  heard  the  voices  of  some  people  on shore,  among  whom  we  could  distinguish  some  women,  who  were  call- ing out  to  them  as  if  apprehensive  of  their  getting  into  danger  and wishing  them  to  return.
We  threw  overboard  two  empty  bottles  which  they  picked  up  from the  water  when  they  had  drifted  astern  to  some  distance.     Finding
that  we  could  not  induce  them  to  come  nearer,  Mr.  W   with  three
or  four  men  went  after  them  in  our  boat  to  endeavour  to  bring  them to  a  conference,  but  in  vain.  They  paddled  off  as  hard  as  they  could, nor  could  our  boats  get  near  them.  While  our  boat  was  in  pursuit  of them,  we  observed  their  motions  from  the  vessel  with  our  telescopes.
A   HISTOUY  OF  OUK  RELATIONS
They  at  first  appeared  to  be  alarmed,  but  soon  showed  signs  of  resolu- tion and  coolness  The  foremost  man  put  down  his  paddle  and  very deliberately  baled  out  the  water.  He  then  took  up  his  bow  and  arrows from  the  bottom  of  the  canoe  and  laid  them  down  by  him.  The  other now  and  then  stopped  paddling  to  look  behind  him.  He  made  signs  to our  people  to  come  on,  and  at  last  clapped  his  hand  to  his  posteriors, probably  as  a  mark  of  contempt.  In  the  afternoon  Captain  K  - and  Mr.  W  ---  went  out  in  the  boat  ;  they  saw  one  of  the  natives  upon the  beach,  who  called  out  and  made  signs  to  them  to  come  near,  but it  was  only  with  an  intention  of  leading  them  into  a  snare,  for  the  boat had  no  sooner  approached  within  fifty  paces  of  him  than  Captain  K— perceived  a  number  of  men  laying  iu  ambush  under  the  mangroves. When  they  found  themselves  detected  they  rushed  out  and  sent  a shower  of  arrows  at  the  boat,  some  of  which  flew  over  it.  Two  mus- kets were  fired  over  their  heads,  which  made  them  retreat,  and  our people  picked  up  about  thirty  of  their  arrows  from  the  water.  They were  all  headed  with  fish  bones  and  some  were  six  feet  long.*  "
(On  the  6th  April  they  passed  close  under  Saddle  Mountain,  esti- mated to  be  not  less  than  2,5<>0  feet  in  height.  Lieutenant  Blair  went ashore  and  saw  some  of  the  natives,  who  fled  at  his  approach.
On  the  7th  April  they  discovered  the  present  Port  Cornwallis. Lieutenant  Blair,  with  the  Hanger  and  Viper,  went  in  to  survey  and examine  it.  Lieutenant  Colebrooke  proceeded  to  Bengal.)
The  following  points  in  the  above  Journal  call  for  note  :  —
The  usual  hostile  attacks  by  the  aborigines  commenced  as  soon  as Lieutenant  Blair  arrived,  and  were  stopped  in  each  instance  by  a  dis- charge of  fire-arms  with  fatal  effect.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that,  be- fore this,  th^se  savages  knew  and  dreaded  fire-arms.
It  was  observed  that  no  cocoa-nut  palms  grew  in  the  Harbour,  and the  nuts  were  accordingly  used  as  presents  to  the  aborigines,  in  the hope  of  establishing  friendly  relations  with  them.
The  description  of  the  savage  met  with  on  the  6th  December, 17^9,  proves  him  to  have  been  what  is  now  known  as  a  "  Jarnwa,"  and
•  Shorter  arrows  aie  now  commonly  used  in  the  North  Andamau.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
this  is  substantiated  by  Lieutenant  Colebrooke's  subsequent  account written  in  1791.  (This  is  inserted  and  commented  on  later.)
The  Snow  Hanger.  It  may  not  be  generally  known  that  a "  Snow"  was  a  craft  frequently  met  with  in  the  17th  and  18th  centu- ries, and  was  a  brig,  which  had  her  Boom  Mainsail  set  on  a  trysail mast,  instead  of,  as  in  the  present  way,  on  the  mast  itself.
Lieutenant  Colebrooke  does  not  seem  to  have  noticed  the  differ- ences between  the  aborigines  he  came  in  contact  with  in  Port Cornwallis  and  the  others,  belonging  to  other  tribes,  whom  he  met with  farther  North.  The  gesture  of  contempt,  mentioned  in  the  Diary for  the  4th  of  April,  is  peculiar  to  the  North  Andaman  Group  of  Tribes. It  will  be  observed  that  a  few  isolated  cocoa-nut  palms  then  existed  at the  Andamanese  villages.
In  1794  Lieutenant  R.  H.  Colebrooke  published  in  the  Journal of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Ben  gal  the  following  monograph  on  the  Anda- manese, which  is  of  the  highest  importance,  being  the  first  really  care- ful and  trustworthy  account  we  have  of  these  people.
On  the  Andaman  Islands.  By  Lieutenant  E-.  H.  Colebrooke, 1794.
"The  Andaman  Islands  are  situated  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Bay of  Bengal,*  extending  from  North  Latitude  10°.  32'.  to  13°.  40'.  Their Longitude  is  from  92°  6'  to  91°  59'  East  of  Greenwich.  The  Great Andaman,  or  that  portion  of  the  land  hitherto  so  called,  is  about  one hundred  and  forty-five  British  miles  in  length,  but  not  more  than twenty  in  the  broadest  parts.  Its  coasts  are  indented  by  several  deep
*  It  is  perhaps  a  wonder  that  islands  so  eitensive,  and  lying  in  the  track  of  so  many  ship* should  have  been,  till  of  late  years,  so  little  known  ;  that  while  the  countries  by  which  they  are almost  encircled,  have  been  increasing  in  population  and  wealth,  having  been  from  time  immemorial in  a  state  of  tolerable  civilization,  these  islands  should  have  remained  in  a  state  of  nature,  and  their inhabitants  plunged  in  the  grossest  ignorance  and  barbarity.  The  wild  appearance  of  the  country, and  the  untractable  and  ferocious  disposition  of  the  natives,  have  been  the  oanses,  probably,  which have  deterred  navigators  from  frequenting  them  ;  and  they  have  justly  dreaded  a  shipwreck  at  the Andamans  more  than  the  danger  of  foundering  in  the  ocean  ;  for  although  it  is  highly  probable that  in  the  course  of  time  many  vessels  have  been  wrecked  upon  their  coasts,  an  instance  does  not occur  of  any  of  the  crews  being  saved,  or  of  a  single  person  returning  to  give  any  account  of  SUCH a  disaster.
K
66
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
bays,  affording  excellent  harbours,  and  it  is  intersected  by  many  vast inlets  and  creeks,  one  of  which  has  been  found  to  run  quite  through, and  is  navigable  for  small  vessels.  The  Little  Andaman  is  the  more southerly  of  the  two,  and  lies  within  thirty  leagues  of  the  island  Car Nicobar.
Its  length  is  28  miles  by  17  in  breadth,  being  more  compact, but  does  not  afford  any  harbour,  although  tolerable  anchorage  is found  near  its  shores.  The  former  is  surrounded  by  a  great  number  of smaller  islands.
The  shores  of  the  main  island,  and  indeed  of  all  the  rest,  are  in some  parts  rocky,  and  in  a  few  places  are  lined  with  a  smooth  and sandy  beach,  where  boats  may  easily  land.  The  interior  shores of  the  bays  and  creeks  are  almost  invariably  lined  with  mangroves, prickly  fern,  and  a  species  of  wild  rattan  ;  while  the  inland  parts  are covered  with  a  variety  of  tall  trees,  darkened  by  the  intermixture  of creepers,  parasite  plants,  and  underwood ;  which  form  altogether  a vast  and  almost  impervious  forest,  spreading  over  the  whole  country. The  smaller  islands  are  equally  covered  with  wood ;  they  mostly contain  hills  of  a  moderate  height  ;  but  the  main  island  is  distin- guished by  a  mountain  of  prodigious  bulk,  called  from  its  shape  the Saddle  Peak  ;  it  is  visible  in  clear  weather  at  the  distance  of  twenty- five  leagues,  being  nearly  two  thousand  four  hundred  feet  in  perpen- dicular height.  There  are  no  rivers  of  any  size  upon  these  islands, but  a  number  of  small  rills  pour  down  from  the  mountains,  affording good  water,  and  exhibiting  in  their  descent  over  the  rocks  a  variety of  little  cascades,  which  are  overshaded  by  the  superincumbent woods.
The  soil  is  various  in  different  part  of  these  islands;*  consisting of  black  rich  mould,  white  and  dark  coloured  clays,  light  sandy  soil, clay  mixed  with  pebbles  of  different  colours,  red  and  yellow  earth;  but the  black  mould  is  most  common.  Some  white  cliffs  are  met  with
*  I  am  indebted  to  Major  Kyd  and  Captain  Archibald  Blair  for  many  of  the  tabaequent remarks.  The  latter  was  employed  by  Government  in  surveying  these  island*,  and  ha»  th» credit  of  having  furnished  the  first  complete  and  correct  chart  of  the  Audamans.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
67
along  the  shores,  which  appear  to  have  been  originally  clay,  with a  mixture  of  sand,  hardened  by  time  into  the  consistence  of  stone, but  might  be  cut,  and  would  probably  answer  for  building.
Near  the  southern  extremity  of  the  great  island,  where  it  is  moun- tainous and  rocky,  some  indications  of  minerals  have  appeared,  par- ticularly of  tin.  There  is  also  a  kind  of  freestone,  containing  a  yellow shining  spar,  resembling  gold-dust.  Some  of  the  hills  bordering  the coasts  exhibit  blue  schistous  strata  at  their  bases,  with  the  breccia, or  pudding  stone  ;  and  some  specimens  of  red  ochre  have  been  found, not  unlike  cinnabar.
The  extensive  forests  with  which  these  islands  are  over-run  pro- duce a  variety  of  trees  fit  for  building,  and  many  other  purposes. The  most  common  are  the  poon,  dammer,  and  oil  trees  ;  redwood, ebony,  cotton-tree,  and  buddaum  or  almond-tree,  &o<>ndry,  chingry, and  lindy,  Alexandrian  laurel,  poplar,  and  a  tree  resembling  the satin-wood  ;  bamboos,  and  plaas,  with  which  the  natives  make  their bows  ;  cutch,  affording  the  extract  called  Terra  Japonica  ;  the  Mel- lon, or  Kicobar  bread-fruit ;  aloes,  ground  rattans,  and  a  variety  of shrubs.
A  few  fruit  trees  have  been  found  in  a  wild  state  ;  but  it  is  re- markable that  cocoa-nuts,  so  common  in  other  tropical  countries,  are here  almost  unknown.  Many  of  the  trees  afford  timbers  and  planks fit  for  the  construction  of  ships,  and  others  might  answer  for  masts. A  tree  grows  here  to  an  enormous  size,  one  having  been  found  to measure  thirty  feet  in  circumference,  producing  a  very  rich  dye,  that might  be  of  use  in  manufactures.
The  only  quadrupeds  yet  discovered  in  these  islands  ace  wild hogs,  monkeys,  and  rats.  Guanas  and  various  reptiles  abound ; among  the  latter  is  the  green  snake,  very  venomous  ;  centipedes  of  ten inches  long,  and  scorpions.
A  variety  of  birds  are  seen  in  the  woods  ;  the  most  common  are pigeons,  crows,  paroquets,  kingfishers,  curlews,  fish-hawks,  and  owls. A  species  of  humming  bird,  whose  notes  are  not  unlike  the  cuckoo,  is
frequently  heard  in  the  night.
cl
68  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
The  principal  caverns  and  and  recesses,  composing  part  of  the  coast, give  shelter  to  the  hirds  that  build  edible  nests ;  an  article  of commerce  in  the  China  market,  where  they  are  sold  at  a  very  high price.  It  has  been  thought  that  these  nests  are  formed  from  a glutinous  matter  exuding  from  the  sides  of  the  caverns  where  these birds,  during  their  nidification,  resort.  It  is  not  known  whether  they emigrate ;  but  the  period  of  their  incubation  takes  place  in  December, and  continues  till  May.  Not  more  than  two  white  spotless  eggs  have been  found  in  their  nests ;  but  they  have  been  further  supposed  to breed  monthly.
The  harbours  and  inlets  from  the  sea  are  plentifully  stocked  with a  variety  of  fish  ;  such  as  mullets,  soles,  pomfret,  rock-fish,  skate, gurnards,  sardines,  roeballs,  sable,  shad,  aloose,  cockup,  grobers,  seer- fish,  old  wives,  yellow  tails,  snappers,  devil-fish,  cat-fish,  prawns, shrimps,  cray-fish,  and  many  others,  and  a  species  resembling  the whale,  and  sharks  of  an  enormous  size,  are  met  with.  A  variety  of shell-fish  are  found  on  the  reefs,  and  in  some  places  oysters  of  an  ex- cellent quality.  Of  the  many  madrepores,  corallines,  zoophytes,  and shells,  none  have  been  yet  discovered  but  such  as  are  found  elsewhere.
The  Andaman  Islands  are  inhabited  by  a  race  of  men  the  least civilized,  perhaps,  in  the  world  ;  being  nearer  to  a  state  of  nature  than any  people  we  read  of.  Their  colour  is  of  the  darkest  hue,  their stature  in  general  small,  and  their  aspect  uncouth.  Their  limbs  are ill- formed  and  slender,  their  bellies  prominent,  and,  like  the  Africans, they  have  woolly  heads,*  thick  lips,  and  flat  noses.
They   go  quite  naked,  the  women  wearing  only  at  times  a  kind
*  In  this  respect  they  differ  from  all  the  various  tribes  inhabiting  the  continent  of  Asia,  or its  inlands.  A  story  is  somewhere  told  of  a  ship  fnll  of  African  slaves,  of  both  sexes,  having  been cast  away  at  the  Andamans  ;  and  that  having  put  to  death  their  masters  and  the  ship's  crew,  they spread  themselves  over,  and  peopled  the  country.  This  story  does  not  appear  to  have  been  well authenticated,  nor  have  I  ever  met  with  the  particular  author  who  relates  it.  They  have  been asserted  by  some  to  be  cannibals,  and  by  others  (vide  Captain  Hamilton's  Voyage,  and  all  the Geographical  Dictionaries)  to  be  a  harmless  and  inoffensive  people,  living  chiefly  on  rice  and vesetables.  That  they  are  cannibals  ha»  never  been  fully  proved,  although  from  their  cruel  and langninary  disposition,  great  voracity,  and  cunning  modes  of  lying  in  ambush,  there  is  reason  to
WITH  THE  ANDAMANE3E.
69
of  tassel,  or  fringe,  round  the  middle  ;  which  is  intended  merely  for ornament,  as  they  do  not  betray  any  signs  of  bashfulness  when  seen without  it.
The  men  are  cunning,  crafty  and  revengeful  ;  and  frequently express  their  aversion  to  strangers  in  a  loud  and  threatening  tone  of voice,  exhibiting  various  signs  of  defiance,  and  expressing  their  con- tempt by  the  most  indecent  gestures.  At  other  times  they  appear quiet  and  docile,  with  the  most  insidious  intent.  They  will  affect  to enter  into  a  friendly  conference,  when,  after  receiving  with  a  show  of humility  whatever  articles  may  be  presented  to  them,  they  set  up  a shout,  and  discharge  their  arrows  at  the  donors.  On  the  appearance of  a  vessel  or  boat,  they  frequently  lie  in  ambush  among  the  trees, and  send  one  of  their  gang,  who  is  generally  the  oldest  among  them, to  the  water's  edge,  to  endeavour  by  friendly  signs  to  allure  the strangers  on  shore.  Should  the  crew  venture  to  land  without  arms, they  instantly  rush  out  from  their  lurking  places,  and  attack  them. In  these  skirmishes  they  display  much  resolution,  and  will  sometimes plunge  into  the  water  to  seize  the  boat ;  and  they  have  been  known even  to  discharge  their  arrows  while  in  the  act  of  swimming.  Their mode  of  life  is  degrading  to  human  nature,  and,  like  brutes,  their
suspect,  that  in  attacking  strangers  they  are  frequently  impelled  by  hunger,  as  they  invariably put  to  death  the  unfortunate  victims  who  fall  under  their  bands.  No  positive  instance,  however has  been  known  of  their  eating  the  flesh  of  their  enemies  ;  although  the  bodies  of  some,  whom they  have  killed,  have  been  found  mangled  and  torn.  It  would  be  difficnlt  to  account  for  their unremitting  hostility  to  strangers,  without  ascribing  this  as  the  cause,  unless  the  story  of  their origin,  us  above-mentioned,  should  be  true  ;  in  whiuh  case  they  might  probably  retain  a  tradition of  having  once  been  in  a  state  of  slavery.  This  in  some  degree  would  account  for  the  rancour and  enmity  they  shew  ;  and  they  would  naturally  wage  perpetual  war  with  those  whom  they might  suspect  were  come  to  invade  their  country,  or  enslave  them  again.
It  would  appear  that  these  islands  were  known  to  the  ancients  (see  Major  Kennel's  Memoirs, introduction,  page  XXXIX  ).  They  are  mentioned,  I  believe,  by  Marco  Polo  ;  and  in  the ancient  accounts  of  India  and  China,  by  two  Mabommedan  travellers,  who  went  to  those  parts in  the  ninth  century  (translated  from  the  Arabic  by  Eusebins  Renaudot  )  may  be  seen  the following  cnrious  account :—  "  Beyond  these  two  islands  {  Nejabalus,  probably  Nicobars)  lies  the sea  of  Andaman  ;  the  people  on  this  coast  eat  human  flesh  quite  raw  ;  their  complexion  is  black, their  hair  frizzled,  their  countenance  and  eyes  frightful,  their  feet  are  very  large  and  almost  a cnbit  in  length,  and  they  go  quite  naked.  They  have  no  embarkations  ;  if  they  had,  they  would devour  all  the  passengers  they  could  lay  hands  on,"  etc.
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
whole  time  is  spent  in  search  of  food.  They  have  yet  made  no attempts  to  cultivate  their  lands,  but  live  entirely  upon  what  they  can pick  up,  or  kill.  In  the  morning  they  ruh  their  skins  with  mud,  and wallow  in  it  like  buffaloes,  to  prevent  the  annoyance  of  insects,  and daub  their  woolly  heads  with  red  ochre,  or  cinnabar.  'Jhus  attired, they  walk  forth  to  their  different  occupations.  The  women  bear  the greatest  part  of  the  drudgery  in  collecting  food,  repairing  to  the  reefs at  the  recess  of  the  tide,  to  pick  up  shell-fish,  while  the  men  are  hunt- ing in  the  woods,  or  wad  ing  in  the  water  to  shoot  fish  with  their  bows and  Arrows.  'Ihey  are  very  dexterous  at  this  extraordinary  mode  of fishing  ;  which  they  practise  also  at  night,  by  the  light  of  a  torch.  In their  excursions  through  the  woods,  a  wild  hog  sometimes  rewards  their toil,  and  affords  them  a  more  ample  repast.  They  broil  their  meat  cr fish  over  a  kind  of  grid,  made  of  bamboos  ;  but  use  no  salt,  or  any other  seasoning.
The  Andamaners  display  at  times  much  colloquial  vivacity,  and are  fond  of  singing  and  dancing  ;  in  which  amusements  the  women equally  participate.  Their  language  is  rather  smooth  than  guttural  ; and  their  melodies  are  in  the  nature  of  recitative  and  chorus,  not  un- pleasing.  In  dancing,  they  may  be  said  to  have  improved  on  the strange  republican  dance  asserted  by  Voltaire  to  have  been  exhibited in  England  :  "  Ou  dansant  a,  la  roude,  chagun  donne  des  coups  de pieds  a  son  voisin,  et  en  re9f  it  autant."  The  Andamaners  likewise dance  in  a  ring,  each  alternately  kicking  and  slapping  his  own  breech, ad  l/bitum.  Their  salutation  is  performed  by  lifting  up  a  leg  and smacking  with  their  hand  the  lower  part  of  the  thigh.
Their  dwellings  are  the  most  wretched  hovels  imaginable.  An Andaman  hut  may  be  considered  the  rudest  and  most  imperfect  at- tempt of  the  human  race  to  procure  shelter  from  the  weather ;  and answers  to  the  idea  given  by  Vitruvius,  of  the  buildings  erected  by the  earliest  inhabitants  of  the  earth.  Three  or  four  sticks  are  planted in  the  ground,  and  fastened  together  at  the  top,  in  the  form  of  a cone,  over  which  a  kind  of  thatch  is  formed  with  the  branches  and leaves  of  trees.  An  opening  is  left  on  one  side,  just  large  enough  to
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
creep  into  ;  and  the  ground  beneath  is  strewed  with  dried  leaves,  upon which  they  lie.  In  these  huts  are  frequently  found  the  sculls  of  wild hogs,  suspended  to  the  roofs.
Their  canoos  are  hollowe'l  out  of  the  trunks  of  trees  hy  maang  of fire  and  instruments  of  stone,  having  no  iron  in  use  amongst  them, except  such  utensils  as  they  have  procured  from  the  Europeans  and sailors  who  have  lately  visited  these  islands  ;  or  from  tiie  wrecks  of vessels  formerly  stranded  on  their  coasts.  They  u<e  al*o  rafts  made of  bamboos  to  transport  themselves  across  their  harbours,  or  from  one island  to  another.  Their  arms  have  already  been  mentioned  in  part  ; I  need  only  add  that  their  bows  are  remarkably  long,  and  of  an  un- common form  ;  their  arrows  are  headed  with  fish  bones,  or  the  tusks of  wild  hogs  ;  sometimes  merely  with  a  sharp  bit  of  wood,  hardened  in the  fire  ;  but  these  are  sufficiently  destructive.  They  use  also  a  kind of  shield  ;  and  one  or  two  other  weapons  have  been  seen  amongst them.  Of  'their  implements  for  fishing  and  other  purposes,  little  can be  said.  Hand  nets  of  different  sizes  are  used  in  catching  the  small fry;  and  a  kind  of  wicker-basket,  which  they  carry  on  their backs,  serves  to  deposit  whatever  articles  of  food  they  can  pick up.  A  few  specimens  of  pottery-ware  have  been  seen  in  these islands.
The  climate  of  the  Andaman  Islands  is  rather  milder  than  in Bengal.  The  prevailing  winds  are  the  south-west  and  north-east monsoons,  the  former  commencing  in  May,  and  bringing  in  the  rains  ; which  continue  to  fall  with  equal,  if  not  greater,  violence  till  Novem- ber. At  this  time  the  north-east  winds  begin  to  blow,  accompanied likewise  by  showers,  but  giving  place  to  fair  and  pleasant  weather during  the  rest  of  the  year.  These  winds  vary  but  little,  and  are interrupted  only  at  times  by  the  land  and  sea-breezes.  The  tides are  regular,  the  floods  setting  in  from  the  west  and  rising  eight feet  at  the  springs,  with  little  variation  in  different  parts.  On the  North-east  coast  it  is  high  water  at  the  full  and  change of  the  moon  at  8°  33'.  The  variation  of  the  needle  is  2"  3'  30* easterly.
72
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
SPECIMEN  OP  THE  ANDAMAN  LANGUAGE. Andaman  Island,  or  native  country.     Mincopie. Ant  .....    Ahooda.
Ant,  white,  in  its  winged  state       .     Doughay.    J.
.    Buttohie.     J.
Arrow Arm
Bat
Bamboo
Bangle
Basket
Black
Blood
Bead
To  Beat      .
Belly
To  Bind     .
Bird
To  Bite      .
Boat
Boar
Bow
Bow-string
Breast
Bone
Charcoal   .
Chin
Cold
Cocoa-nut .
Cotton  cloth
To  Cough  .
Crow
To  Cut      .
Door
Pilie.    J.
Vilvila.     B.
Otallie.    J.
Alai.
Teregay.
Cheegheooga.
Cochengohee.     J.
Tahee.     J.
Ingo  taheya.     J.
Napoy.    J.
Totoha  oto  goley  toha.     B.
Lohay.     J.
Moepaka.    B.
Loccay.
Stohee.
Tongie.
Geetahie.
Cah,        J.
Geetongay.        J.
"W  ehee.
Pitang.        J.  . Choma. Bollatee. Pangapee. Ingotahey.        J. Nohay.        J. Hojeeha.
Tang.        B.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANE8E.
73
To  Drink  .
.    Meengohee.        J.
Earth Ear To  Eat      .
Elbow
Eye
.    Totongnangee.        J. .     Quaka.        J. .     Ingelholiah.         J. .    Mohalajabay.        J. .    Jabay.        J.
Finger Fire
.    Momay. .    Mona.
J.
Fish
.    Nabohee.
Fish-hook  .
.    Atabea.
B.
Flesh
.    Woohee.
Foot
.     Gookee.
J.
Friend
.    Padoo.
Frog
.    Etolay.
J.
Goat
.    Kokee.
To  Go
.    Oosseema.
Grass        ...
.         .    Tohohee.
Hair
Hand Head
Honey Hot House
.    Ottee.
.    Gonie.    or .    Tahay.
.    Lorkay. .    Hooloo. .     Beaday.
J.
Monie.        J. J.
J. B. J.
Jack  Fruit Jackal Iron,  or  any  metal
.    Abay. .    Omay. .     Dobie.
J. J.
Kiss Knee
.    Itolie. .    Ingolay.
J. J.
To  Laugh Leaf  of  a  Tree   . Leg Man          .         «
.     Onkeomai. .        .    Tongolie. .     Chigie, .         .    Camolan.
J. B.
74
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
Moon
Mosquito
Mouth
Nail
Neck
Net
Nose
Paddle    or    Oar
Pain
Palm
Paper
Pike
To  Pinch  .
Plantain-tree     .
Pot
To  Pull    .
Rain
Red
Road
To  Run     .
To  Scratch Seed
Sheep  *     . Smoke To  Sing     . To  Sit  down Shadow     . To  Sleep  . To  Sneeze To  Spit     . To  Swim  ,
.  Tabie.
.  Hohenangee.
.  Morna.
.  Mobejedanga.        J.
.  Tohie,        J.
.  Botolee.        J.
.  Mellee.
.  Mecal.
.  Alooda.
.  Dolai.
.  Pangpoy.
.  Woohalay.
.  Ingee  Genecha.        i
.  Cholellee,        J.
.  Bootchoohie.        B.
.  Totobati  Gehooa .
•  Oye.
.  Gheallop.
.  Echollee.        J. Gohabela.        J.
.  Inkahey  aha.
.  Kheetongay.
.  Neena.
.  Boleenee.
.  Gokobay.        J.
.  Gongtohee.
.  Tangtohee.
.  Comoha.        J.
.  Oh-cheka.        J.
.  Inkahoangy.
.  Quaah.        J.
J.
*  It  may  appear  surprising  that  they  should   have  names  for  animals — that  are  not  found  in their  islands.     This  circumstance  ma;  tend  to  confirm  the  story  of  their  origin.
WITH  THE  ANDAMAN K6B.  73
To  Swallow
.     Beehay.
Sky           ....
.     Madamo.
Star          ....
.     Chelobay.        J.
Stone        ....
.     Woolay.
Sun          ....
.     Ahay.
To  Take  up
.     Catoha,
Thigh        ....
.     Poye.
Teeth        ....
.     Mahoy.
Tongue      ....
.     Talie.        J.
Thunder  and  lightning
.     Maufay-Maccee.
To  Wash
.    Inga  doha.
Wasp        ....
.     Bohomakee.
To  Walk  ....
.     Boony-jaoa.
Water       ....
.     Migway.
To  Weep  ....
.     Oana-wannah.         J.
Wind        ....
.     Totnjamay.
Wood
.     Tausrhee.         J.
(The  notes  to  the  above  narrative  are  equally  Colebrooke's  with the  body  of  it.)
With  regard  to  this  narrative,  the  following  comments  are  offered  : By  "  prickly  pear  "  on  the  banks  of  the  creeks,  Colebrooke  probably meant  the  species  of  Phoanix.
The  "  gold-dust  "  he  noticed  was  probably  iron  pyrites,  and the  specimens  oi  "  red  ochre,"  are  red  ochre,  and  not  "  cinnabar."
Forests. — By  Red-wood,  Padouk  is  understood.  The  ebony  of commerce  does  not  exist  on  the  Andamans,  nor  do  Alexandrian laurel,  or  poplar.  Aloes  also  are  not  indigenous,  otherwise  the  de- scription of  the  jungle  is  a  very  good  one.
Fauna. — Monkeys  do  not  exist  on  the  Andamans.  The  green snake  is  probably  the  Trimeresurus.  The  humming-bird  with  a  note like  a  cuckoo  has  not  been  met  with,  two  birds  being  here  confounded.
Aborigines.—  Colebrooke  has  evident  doubts  as  to  their  alleged
t2
76
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
cannibalism,  but  is  loth  to  break  with  former  traditions.  The  idea  of the  Andamanese  being  the  offspring  of  ship-wrecked  slaves  he  also  re- ceives with  caution,  but  gives  reasons  for  believing  it.
The  account  shows  that  Blair  was  acquainted  with  two  tribes  in the  South  Andaman,  as  can  be  discerned  from  the  vocabulary  given and  the  description  of  their  habits,  etc.  These  two  have  apparently been  supposed  to  be  one,  but  the  vocabulary  and  many  of  the  habits refer  only  to  the  Jarawa  Tribe  of  the  South  Andaman,  while  the  in- decent gestures  of  contempt  belong  to  the  North  Andaman  Group of  Tribes,  and  the  fishing  by  night  probably  to  the  Aka-£e«-da  Tribe  of the  South  Andaman.  The  Aka-.Z?ea-da  keep  their  spare  meat  on  a bamboo  platform,  but  no  Andamanese  broils  meat  on  a  bamboo  grid.
The  dance  described  is  that  of  the  Onge  Group  of  Tribes.
The  Aka-.B<?a-da  use  canoes,  the  Jarawas  generally  use  rafts. So  far  as  I  can  learn  (for  the  Andamanese  have  no  recollection  of the  Settlement  in  1790),  it  would  appear  that  at  that  time  the  Jara- was occupied  the  South  side  of  the  Harbour,  and  the  Alja-.B<?a-da  the North  side.  There  were  occasional  individual  friendly  relations  be- tween the  members  of  these  two  tribes,  but  they  were  then,  as  now, generally  hostile.  It  is  curious  that  the  tribe  most  friendly  disposed towards  the  Settlement  in  1790  should  have  been  the  Tribe  of  Jara- was with  whom  we  have,  in  the  present  Settlement,  entirely  failed  to establish  friendly  relations.
The  ''long  bows  "  mentioned  may  be  the  very  long  and  clumsy bows  of  the  Jarawa  tribe,  or  the  peculiarly  shaped  Aka- Sea-da  bow. Colebrooke  probably  saw  both.  The  tusks  of  wild  hogs  were  not
used  for  arrow  heads.
What   Colebrooke   (and    many  others)  takes  for  a   "  shield "  is
the  "  dancing  board  "  of  the  South  Andaman  Group  of  Tribes.  The Jarawas  have  not  got  this.
Vocabulary. — The  first  word  of  this  is  "  Mincopie  "  said  to  sig- nify "  The  Andaman  Islands,"  and  hence  the  name  "  Mincopie  " given  generally  to  the  Andamanese.  Colebrooke's  paper  was  little known, and  the  name  remained  as  a  puzzle  to  those  who  have  had  to do  with  the  Andamanese  since  the  formation  of  the  present  Settle-
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
77
ment  in  1858,  as  the  word  was  unknown  to  any   of  the  tribes   with whom  we  had  friendly  relations.
I  append  a  list  of  words  of  the  Onge  Group  of  Tribes  \vhich,  allow- ing for  difference  of  spelling,  correspond  with  the  words  in   Cole- brooke's  Vocabulary  :
Arrow. Arm.
Bart6i. Onibfle.
Bamboo
Audale".
Breast. Bone. Chin. Drink,  to
Gage. Ichin-dange". Ibi-ddnge". Inj6be".
Earth. Ear. Eat,  to Eye.
Tutan6. Ikwdge". Onil6  kwatebe". Onijeboi.
Finger. Foot. Hair.
Mome*. Huge".
Aude\
Hand.
Mdme".
House.
Be-dai.
Iron  adze.
Doi-i.
Nail,  of  the  finger.
M6b6-dung6.
Pinch,  to.
Plantain-tree.
Oni-ginibe". Y61aule.
Pot.
Buchu.
Eoad.
Ich61e.
Run,  to.
Ahd-b^Mb6.
Sing,  to. Sleep,  to. Sneeze,  to. Spit,  to.
Gogabdbe. Omokab^.    Omohan. Echibe. Ona-kwange.
HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
Swim,  to. Star.  (Moon.) Sun.
Kvrane. Chilome. Eke.
Teeth.
Makwe.
Water.
Inge.
Weep,  to.  Wanabe.
Canoe  of  Wood.  Dange".
Note. — "  Laugh"  "  Onkeomai,"  resembles  a  Jarawa  word  for an  indecent  expression,  which  may  have  been  what  the  person  ques- tioned was  laughing  at.
"  Camolan"  as  a  word  for  "  Man  "  cannot  be  traced,  but  it seems  to  me  that  it  may  be  a  Jarawa  attempt  to  pronounce  "  Come along,"  a  sentence  the  captives  must  have  frequently  heard.
Some  of  the  words  appear  to  me  to  have  been  obtained  from  the Aka--5e'«-da  tribe,  and  I  have  therefore  marked  against  the  words,  as I  identify  them,  J,  for  Jarawa,  and  B.  for  Aka-  #^<*-da.
Some  words  I  recognise  as  Jarawa,  but  they  have  now  entirely different  meanings  from  those  given,  and  this  may  be  owing  to  mis- understandings on  both  sides.  Thus  the  word  for  *'  moon  "  is  given as  "  star."
I  do  not  think  this  is  in  the  least  owing  to  the  language  having altered  during  the  last  hundred  years,  and  I  propose,  when  analysing  the Vocabularies  compiled  during  the  first  six  years  of  the  existence  of the  present  penal  Settlement  (1858-64),  to  show  how  ludicrously misleading  some  of  these  misunderstandings  are.  Colebrooke  evident- ly obtained  his  information  at  second-hand,  and  the  persons  from whom  he  obtained  it  could  not  have  been  long  enough  on  friendly  terms with  the  aborigines  of  any  one  tribe  to  have  compiled  a  trustworthy vocabulary.  The  remarkable  point  about  Colebrooke's  paper  is  that it  should  contain  so  much  that  is  reliable  and  correct.
The  Andamanese  are  an  intensely  conservative  people,  and  do not  change  their  customs  quickly,  even  under  outside  example  and influence.
They  are,   however,  not  very  ready  to  explain  these  customs,  or  to
WITH  TUB  ANDAMANESE.  79
enlighten  strangers  regarding  their  mode  of  life  (partly  from  fear  of ridicule);  and,  as  I  am  well  aware,  will,  out  of  sheer  love  of  mischief, deliberately  give  incorrect  information,  or,  as  will  be  pointed  out  in subsequent  comments  on  the  Vocabularies,  give  abusive  answers  or indecent  words  to  persons  wishing  to  learn  something  of  their  lan-
guage.
Much  of  our  present  information  has  been  collected  by  a  careful watching  of  their  actions  (coupled  of  course  w  ith  a  knowledge  of their  language),  when  they  were  not  aware  they  were  being  so watched.
Nothing  was  easier  than  for  the  earlier  observers,  who  did  not know  the  language,  to  fall  into  error.  Even  in  the  present  day  edu- cated men  have  spent  years  in  the  Andamans,  and  have  left  the Islands  with  very  inaccurate  ideas  regarding  the  aborigines.
80
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
CHAPTER  IV.
Lieutenant  Blair's  notes — Barren  Island — Establishment  of  the  Settlement — Extracts from  the  Calcutta  Gazette — Change  of  the  Settlement  from  the  South  to  the  North Andaman — Sickness — Abandonment  of  the  Settlement — Major  Kyd's  Eeports  on the  Andamanese — Voyage  de  Gaul  Schouten  aux  Indes  Orientales — Ritchie's Survey  of  the  Andaman  Islands — Extract  from  the  Calcutta  Monthly  Begister — Major  Byrnes'  account  of  the  Andamanese — Notes  on  the  account.
THE  following  brief  account  of  our  operations  in  the  Andamans from  1789-96  has  been  obtained  from  Lieutenant  Blair's  notes.
On  his  arrival  in  the  Islands  he  first  examined  the  harbours,  and comments  on  them  with  his  usual  accuracy  and  trustworthiness.  He minutely  surveyed  Port  Andaman  and  approved  of  it.  He  examined Port  Campbell,  but  thought  it  would  be  difficult  of  access  in  the South-West  monsoon.  He  noted  that  MacPherson's  Straits  was  a good  shelter  with  a  bad  anchorage,  and  above  all  approved  of  the present  Port  Blair.  In  September,  1789,  he  took  possession  of  this Harbour,  called  it  Port  Cornwallis  after  the  Governor-General,  and  a little  colony  was  speedily  formed.  With  his  assistant,  Lieutenant Wales,  he  appears  to  have  divided  his  time  between  the  surveying  of the  Andaman  Islands  and  the  establishment  of  this  Settlement  in Port  Cornwallis.
His  account  of  the  Volcano  of  Barren  Island,  as  he  saw  it  on  the 24th  March,  1789,  is  interesting.  He  writes : —
"  I  left  that  coast  March  the  21st,   and  landed  on  Barren  Island
on  the  24th.    The  Volcano  was  in  a  violent  state  of  eruption,  bursting
out  immense  volumes  of  smoke,  and  frequently  showers  of  red  hot
stones.     Some  were  of  a  size  to   weigh  three  or  four  tons,  and  had
been  thrown  some  hundred  yards  past  the  foot  of  the  cone.    There
were  two  or  three  eruptions  while  we  were  close  to   it :  several  of
the  red  hot  stones  rolled  down  the  sides  of  the   cone  and  bounded
a  considerable  way  beyond  us.    The  base  of  the  cone  is  the  lowest
part  of  the   island,  and  very   little  higher  than  the  level  of  the
WITH  THE  AKDAMANESE.
sea.  It  arises  with  an  acclivity  of  32°17'  to  the  height  of  1,800 feet  nearly,  which  is  also  the  elevation  of  the  other  parts  of  the island.
"  From  the  present  figure  it  may  be  conjectured  that  the  Volcano first  broke  out  near  the  centre  of  the  Island,  or  rather  towards the  north-west;  and  in  a  long  process  of  time,  by  discharging,  con- suming, and  undermining,  has  brought  it  to  the  present  very extraordinary  form,  of  which  a  very  correct  drawing  by  Lieutenant Wales  will  impress  a  distant  idea.
"  Those  parts  of  the  island  that  are  distant  from  the  Volcano  are thinly  covered  with  withered  shrubs  and  blasted  trees.  It  is  situated in  Latitude  12°15'  North,  and  fifteen  leagues  East  of  the  northern- most island  of  the  Archipelago,  and  may  be  seen  at  the  distance  of twelve  leagues  in  clear  weather.  A  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  shore there  is  no  ground  with  150  fathoms  of  line."
The  drawing  of  the  volcano  by  Wales  represents  it  as  at  present, with  the  addition  of  the  smoke.  If  Blair  was  as  correct  as  usual in  his  figures,  the  volcano  was  650  feet  higher  then  than  it  is  now.
Lieutenant  Blair  fixed  on  Chatham  Island  as  his  head-quarters in  Port  Cornwallis,  and  by  August,  1790,  had  cleared  the  greater portion  of  it,  and  planted  it  *ith  vegetables  and  fruit  trees.  The higher  parts  of  the  Island  were  sown  with  grass.
Provisions  were  imported  from  Penang  and  Calcutta.  One  hun- dred and  nineteen  working  men  were  housed,  store-houses  and  a hospital  Were  built,  and  there  was  little  sickness.  Lieutenant  Blair seems  to  have  at  once  attempted  to  open  a  trade  in  Andaman  timbers, and  some  specimens  were  sent  to  Calcutta.  Padouk  was  even  then specially  noticed,  but  only  because,  from  its  colour,  it  was  thought it  would  yield  a  good  dye.
A  jungle  road  was  cut  in  a  southerly  direction  from  the  top  of Phoenix  Bay  to  the  head  of  the  bay  next  to  it  (probably  Navy  Bay), and  this  was  intended  to  serve  as  a  line  of  demarcation  for  the natives,  while  the  clearing  of  the  peninsula  to  the  West  of  it  (now called  Haddo),  was  proceeded  with,  this  having  been  selected  on
A  HISTORY  OF  OTJB  RELATIONS
account  of  its  situation,  soil,  and  being  well  watered,  as  the  best  place for  immediate  cultivation  and  improvement.
In  December,  1790,  the  ship's  guns,  which  had  been  placed  in  a redoubt  on  Chatham  Island,  as  a  protection  against  the  Andamanese, had  to  be  removed  and  replaced  on  board  the  Hanger,  it  being necessary  to  despatch  that  vessel  to  Penang  to  reinforce  that  Settle  • ment,  which  was  threatened  by  the  neighbouring  Malay  tribes.  The power  of  the  Andamanese  was  now,  however,  justly  estimated,  and artillery  as  a  defence  against  them  was  not  required,  A  wharf  was then  constructed  at  Chatham,  and  completed  in  February,  1791,  in time  to  facilitate  the  landing  of  500  tons  of  naval  stores,  imported at  that  time  for  the  use  of  His  Majesty's  ships,  the  whole  of  which, (Perseverance,  festal,  Ariel,  Atalanta,  and  Crown},  employed  in  the Bay  of  Bengal,  now  paid  constant  visits  to  the  Andamans,  Though recommended  by  Lieutenant  Blair  before,  it  was  not  until  1791  that those  settlers  who  had  visited  Calcutta  on  their  private  affairs were  allowed  to  take  their  families  to  the  new  colony.
Although  from  the  fact  that  Lieutenant  Blair  was  ignorant that  he  had  more  than  one  tribe  of  savages  to  deal  with  in  the  Harbour, and  that  the  two  tribes  there  were  mutually  hostile  and  ignorant  of each  other's  languages,  it  is  difficult  to  ascertain  from  his  notes  exactly what  did  pass,  it  would  appear  that  he,  very  soon  after  his  arrival, established  friendly  relations  with  the  Jarawa  tribe  who  occupied  the Southern  half  of  the  Harbour.  The  Aka-J5m-da,  who  occupied  the Northern  half,  do  not  seem  to  have  troubled  him  at  first,  though  they did  so  later.  He  attributes  their  ferocity  to  the  ill-treatment  they  had received  from  the  Malays,  about  whom,  and  their  slaving  of  the Andamanese,  he  seemed  to  have  some  information.  Later  on,  owing to  the  attacks  of  the  Aka-.Z?^a-da,  whom  he  confounded  with  the Jarawas,  he  seems  to  have  changed  his  opinion  regarding  the  abori- gines (to  whom  he  was  at  first  favourably  inclined),  and  disliked  and distrusted  them.
That  the  Andamanese  were  cunning  and  crafty,  and  also  treach- erous, seems  to  have  been  known,  but  Lieutenant  Blair  notes  : *'  Several  of  the  natives  have  been  carried  off  to  gratify  unwar-
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
rantable  curiosity,  and  others  have  been   entrapped   and  sold  for slaves."
By  the  end  of  1790  the  Aka-2?4o-da  seem  to  have  been  giving  a great  deal  of  trouble,  both  from  thoir  open  animosity  and  their treachery,  and  Lieutenant  Blair  mentions  that  a  number  of  the  abor- igines had  collectei  for  an  attack  on  the  Settlement,  which  wns frustrated  by  his  seizing  three  of  their  large  canoe*  which  they  had  left unguarded.  The  existence  of  these  canoes  shows  the  tribe  to  have been  the  Aka--B^«-da,  though  I  have  some  doubt  as  to  the  correct interpretation  of  their  intentions  by  people  who  were  totally ignorant  of  their  language.  These  savages  do  not  always  mean  all that  they  seem  to  mean.
The  following  occurrence  is  also  related.
Sir    R.    Strachan,   the   Captain   of   His    Majesty's  Ship  Festal, had   accompanied  Lieutenant   Blair  on  his   visit  to  a  portion  of  the Harbour  at  some  distance  from  the  Settlement,  when  they  were  joined by  two  young  natives,   who   voluntarily  accompanied   them   back  to Chatham     Island.      "Their  youth   and   apparent   innocence,"   says Lieutenant  Blair,  "  prevented  my  entertaining  the  le  ist  unfavourable suspicion  of  them,"  but  they  decamped  during  the   night,   and  took away  with  them  one  of  the  boats,   fragments  of  which   w°re   found some  days  afterwards  at  the  place  from  whence  the  youths  first  came. Those  youths  may  have  come  in  with  a   preconcerted  plan  to  steal, though  it  is  difficult  to  understand  how   they   could   have  been  aware that  Lieutenant   Blair  was   going  up  the  unfrequented  parts  of  the Harbour  on  that  particular  day,  but  it  seems  equally  likely  that  they intended  to  be  friendly,  but  were  frightened  at  something   during  the night  and  bolted.     The  Andamanese  are  very  easily   scared,   and   are timid  and  distrustful  of  strangers,  particularly  if  too  much   attention is  paid  to  them.     They  would  of  course  take   a  boat  in   order   to  get away  from  the  island,  and  it  is  not  recorded  that  they  took  anything else.     As  will  be  shown  later  on,  neither    European   sailors    nor   the ordinary  Natives  of  India  are  the  best  and  safest  kind  of   guards   to put  over  the  Andamanese.     In  1791  Lieutenant  Blair  notes  that  the Settlement  uas  healthy  and  the  aborigines  no  longer  continued  their
84
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
annoyances,  but  occasionally  visited  Chatham  Island  for  the  purpose of  begging  for  some  scraps  of  iron  or  a  little  food.
In  March,  1792,  he  reports :  "  The  8ettlement  had  been  so  healthy as  to  suffer  no  injury  from  the  absence  of  the  surgeon,  who  had  been to  Calcutta  on  leave,  and  the  natives  have  been  perfectly  inoffensive for  a  long  time,  and  are  becoming  every  day  more  familiar — they seem  now  convinced  that  our  intentions  towards  them  are  pacific."
On  one  occasion,  when  the  Ranger  was  about  to  proceed  to  the Southern  Nicobar,  one  of  the  natives  was  induced  to  go  in  the  vessel, and  he  was  allowed  to  bring  back  as  many  cocoa-nuts  as  he  pleased.
The  Settlement  in  the  Southern  Port  Cornwallis  appears  to  have been  a  srreat  success,  both  from  a  sanitary  and  from  a  political  point of  view,  and  Lieutenant  Blair  behaved  with  a  judicious  firmness  and ability  which  might  well  have  been  imitated  in  the  earlier  days  of  the present  Settlement.  His  sick  and  death-rate  were  low,  the  colony was  flourishicg,  and  lie  established,  with  the  least  possible  trouble  and bloodshed,  friendly  relations  with  the  aborigines.  His  whole  adminis- tration in  the  Andamans  points  to  his  being  a  man  of  first-rate  ability and  exceptional  gifts.
The  Government  were,  however,  unable  to  let  well  alone,  and  a change  was  made  in  1792,  from  which  dates  the  downfall  of  the  colony.
On  the  13th  April,  1790,  Lieutenant  Blair  reported  that  North- East  Harbour  (now  known  as  Port  Cornwallis)  was  "  deserving  the attention  of  the  Governor-General."  In  November  of  the  same  year this  new  harbour  was  visited  by  Commodore  Cornwallis,  who  formed a  very  favourable  opinion  of  it,  and  directed  Lieutenant  Blair  to  make a  particular  survey  of  it.
This  was  executed  during  March,  1791,  and  on  receipt  of  it  the Commodore  thus  wrote  to  his  brother  the  Governor-General :  —
"I  think  North-East  Harbour  vastly  superior  for  a  fleet  of  Men- of-war  to  Port  Cornwallis ;  the  latter,  I  consider,  too  confined  and liable  to  accidents,  as  well  as  being  more  subject — from  being  sur- rounded with  high  hills—  to  sudden  and  violent  squalls.  They  are alike  in  respect  to  fresh  water,  the  runs  being  occasioned  by  the  rains, and  in  regard  to  defence.  The  Island  is  not  near  a  gunshot  from  the
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
farthest  shore,  which  I  tried  by  throwing  shot  across  whoa  working out.  And  though  the  Island  is  small,  there  is  a  great  de-xl  dry  at the  lowest  tides.  —  I  should  apprehend,  full  sufficient  for  batteries."
He  further  recommended  the  removal  of  the  colony  from  Chatham Island,  in  the  Southern  Harbour,  to  this  Harbour,  and  offered  to assist  in  the  operations.  The  squalls  from  off  Saddle  Peak  are  fairly violent  in  the  Northern  Harbour,  and  the  latter  p^rt  of  the  letter  is not  understood.  The  "Island"  he  refers  to  must  be  the  one  called "  Koss  "  at  the  mouth  of  the  Harbour.
In  September,  1791,  Lieutenant  Blair  was  informed  that  it  was  the intention  of  Government  to  move  the  Settlement  to  the  North- East  Harbour,  and  although  this  move  did  not  actually  take  place for  more  than  a  year  afterwards,  all  progress  was  at  once  stopped.
Ou  the  16th  October,  1792,  final  orders  were  given  for  the  removal of  the  Settlement,  and  on  the  5th  November,  1792,  the  Governor- General  recorded  a  Minute  on  the  subject,  detailing  the  method  of the  transfer,  and  the  object  of  the  ne\v  Settlement.  The  original intention  was  to  establish  a  naval  arsenal,  in  accordance  with  the recommendation  of  the  Commodore.  Captain  Alexander  Kyd  of  the Engineers  was  nominated  Superintendent,  to  be  assisted  by  a  Subal- tern of  the  same  Corps,  and  the  garrison  were  to  be  one  or  two  com- panies of  sepoys.  The  necessary  buildings  and  fortifications  were  to  be erected  ;  four  vessels  were  to  be  fitted  out  for  the  conveyance  of artificers'  stores,  etc.  ;  and  the  whole  was  to  be  under  the  orders  of Lieutenant  Blair  until  he  was  relieved  by  Captain  Kyd.  The  Governor- General  and  his  Council  at  the  same  time  expressed  satisfaction  at Lieutenant  Blair's  conduct,  and  said  that  "  his  attention  and  abilities in  the  management  of  our  first  Settlement  at  the  Audamans  claim  our warm  approbation."
He  was  granted,  on  the  5th  November,  1792,  an  allowance  of B150  per  month,  in  addition  to  his  surveyor's  allowance,  for  the  time he  was  in  charge  of  the  Settlement.  Captain  Kyd  had  Bl,000  a month  in  addition  to  the  pay  and  allowances  of  his  rank.
Lieutenant  Blair,  who  was  in  Calcutta,  where  ho  had  taken  two of  the  Andamanese,  had  the  four  vessels  placed  under  his  orders,  and
86  •*•  HISTORY  OP  ODR  RELATIONS
on  the  12th  November  received  his  sailing  orders.  It  was  then  direct- ed that  the  new  Settlement  should  also  be  called  Port  Cornwallis,  and Lieutenant  Blair  was  to  found  it  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as  the  old one.  He  was  to  clear  Chatham  Island,  erect  temporary  buildings  for the  protection  of  provisions,  lay  out  a  garden,  dig  a  well,  etc.  The Commodore  would  shortly  arrive  with  some  King's  ships  to  assist. On  the  arrival  of  Captain  Kyd  the  Settlement  was  to  be  transferred to  him,  and  Lieutenant  Blair  was  to  finish  the  survey  of  the  Anda- mans,  "  if  time  would  admit,"  and  ascertain  the  relative  positions of  the  Southern  Nicobar  Island  with  Atcheen.  The  Andamanese taken  by  Lieutenant  Blair  to  Calcutta  were  probably  Jarawas,  and  this incident  gives  another  proof  of  the  friendly  relations  established  with them  by  him.  It  is  most  unfortunate  that  we  have  no  detailed account  of  these  people  by  Lieutenant  Blair.
The  following  papers  throw  some  light  on  the  reasons  of  the Government  for  moving  the  Settlement  from  the  South  to  the  North Harbour,  and  on  the  subsequent  operations  in  the  latter  place.
Extract  from  the  Madras  Courier  of  the  22nd  December,  1790  :  
Yesterday  evening  His  Majesty's  Sloop-of-war,   Atalanta,  Captain Halsted,  arrived  in  the  roads  from  the  Andamans.
The  Hon'ble  Commodore  Cornwallis  was  at  the  Andamans  on board  the  Grown  when  the  Atalanta  came  away  ;  and  it  appears  by the  accounts  she  has  brought,  that  a  new  harbour  had  been  discovered in  one  of  the  small  islands  to  the  North-East,  extremely  capacious and  commodious,  much  more  so  than  even  the  former  one,  which  has been  hitherto  occupied  and  known  by  the  name  of  Port  Cornwallis,  '
The  name,  therefore,  will  probably  be  now  transferred  where  it  is best  deserved,  and  the  new  harbour  established.
(Selections  from  the  Calcutta  Gazette  of  the  13th  January  1791 by  Seton  Karr.     Vol.  II,  page  283.)
The  excellence  of  the  harbour  and  climate,  with  the  docility  of  the inhabitants  and  fertility  of  the  soil,  has  induced  Commodore  Corn- v-allis  to  recommend  that  fortifications  be  erected  and  a  garrison appointed  at  our  new  Settlement  on  the  Andaman  Islands;  should
WI1H  THE  ANDAMAN  ESB.
this  bo  put  in  execution,  it  will  no  doubt  hereafter  bo  the  Company's principal  maritime  rendezvous  in  tho  Bay  of  Bengal.
Tbe  Viper  Cruiser,  Captain  Roper,  is,  we  understand,  to  sail in  a  few  days  with  despatches  for  the  Commodore  at  that  place.
(Selections  from  the  Calcutta  Gazette  of  the  18th  of  October, 1792,  by  Seton  Karr.  Vol.  II,  page  351.)
The  above  is  the  only  intimation  we  have  that  the  Aborigines  in the  North  Andaman  bad  proved  to  be  less  hostile  than  those  in  the South.
The  29th  May,  1794. Military  Intelligence,  May  19th,  1794.
Lieutenant  Sandys,  Fort  Adjutant,  is  appointed  to  superintend and  execute  in  Bengal  the  duties  connected  with  the  Andaman Islands,  in  supplying  the  artificers  and  workmen  required  from  time to  time,  taking  charge  of  the  workmen  and  Sepoys  returning  from thence  on  leave  of  absence,  or  for  the  benefit  of:  their  health,  provid- ing passage,  and  superintending  their  embarkation  on  their  return thither,  and  paying  the  families  of  settlers  residing  in  Bengal  the portion  of  allowance  allotted  to  them  for  subsistence  ;  also  superin- tending the  embarkation  of  the  convicts  sentenced  to  be  transported  to those  Islands,  the  provisions  and  articles  of  supply  for  the  Settlement to  be  furnished  as  heretofore  on  indent  on  the  Garrison  Store-keeper.
The  Governor-General  in  Council,  in  consideration  of  these  addi- tional duties,  and  for  other  reasons,  has  been  pleased  to  increase  the allowance  of  the  Port  Adjutant,  150  Sonat  Rupees  per  month,  to commence  from  the  1st  of  May.
(Selections  from  the  Calcutta  Gazette,  by  Seton  Karr.  Vol.  Ill, page  117.)
Lieutenant  Blair  left  Calcutta  in  the  Union,  with  the  Juno, Corntcallis,  and  Seahorse,  on  the  4th  December,  1792.  He  had artificers'  stores,  six  months'  provisions,  and  360  settlers.
Off  Cape  Negrais  there  was  violent  storm,  in  which  the  ships parted  company.  The  Union  arrived  at  the  new  Settlement  on the  30th  December  and  found  Lieutenant  Wales  there  in  the
A  HISTORY  OF  OOU  RELATIONS
Ranger.  He  had  already  commenced  to  clear  sites  and  make  a watering  place.  Commodore  Cornwallis  put  in  in  the  Minerva  to take  shelter  from  a  gale,  in  which  the  Ranger  in  4^  fathoms  at  the head  of  the  harhour  had  the  sea  breaking  over  her,  and  after  losing an  anchor,  was  driven  on  to  a  mud  bank  with  only  seven  feet  of  water, though  she  drew  14  feet.  The  Union  lost  two  anchors  and  was
•j
driven  on  to  the  same  bank,  and  the  Minerva  lost  an  anchor.  It appears  to  have  been  a  cyclone,  the  centre  of  which  passed  a  little  to the  south  of  Port  Cornwallis,  as,  at  Port  Blair,  Lieutenant  Roper  in the  Piper,  who  was  making  the  last  arrangements  for  the  removal of  the  old  colony,  only  experienced  a  strong  south-west  wind,  while the  Seahorse  and  Cornwallis,  only  160  miles  from  the  Settlement, had  fine  weather.
The  Juno  is  supposed  to  have  been  exposed  to  the  full  force  of the  cyclone,  as  some  vessel  fired  a  gun  off  the  mouth  of  the  harbour at  night,  which  was  answered,  and  the  vessel  stood  out  again  to  sea.
The  Juno  was  never  heard  of  again,  and  is  supposed  to  have foundered.  Besides  her  crew,  there  were  90  settlers,  and  a  large quantity  of  provisions  on  board.
The  work  of  the  new  colony  progressed  rapidly.  On  the  31st December,  Lieutenant  Blair  reported  that  a  space  600  by  109  yards had  been  cleared  on  Chatham  Island.  A  double  line  of  huts  had been  built,  wells  and  tanks  made,  three  bungalows  erected,  a  smithy and  pottery  kiln  were  in  course  of  erection,  also  a  temporary  store- house. Two  acres  had  been  cleared  and  stocked  (on  Pitt  Island) as  a  kitchen-garden  and  nursery,  The  Settlement  fishermen  procured sufficient  fish,  turtle  were  brought  from  Diamond  Island,  and  cocoa-nuts from  the  Cocos.  The  natives  were  occasionally  seen  on  the  reefs,  but were  neither  hostile  nor  inclined  for  closer  intimacy.
When  the  present  Settlement  experienced  the  cyclone  of  Novem- ber 2nd,  1891,  great  surprise  was  exhibited,  as  it  was  supposed  that the  Andarnans  only  formed  the  cyclones,  and  were  out  of  the reach  of  their  violence.  A  glance  at  the  records  would  have  shown that  these  Islands  are  visited  at  intervals  by  most  destructive storms.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  89
(The  above-mentioned  one,  occurring  at  the  very  commencement of  the  Settlement  in  the  Northern  Port  Cornwallis,  would  seem ominous  of  the  disastrous  effect  of  the  change  from  the  Southern Harbour.)
It  seems  curious  to  us  now  that  turtle  should  have  been  brought
O
to  the  Andamans  from  Diamond  Island,  but  the  turtle  are  caught there  on  shore,  by  "  turning,"  and  in  the  Andamans,  except  on  the South  Sentinel  Island,  where  landing  is  impossible  ten  months  out  of the  year,  this  can  seldom  be  done,  as  the  turtle  appear  to  have  learnt to  avoid  the  aborigines  who  molested  them.  Turtle  could,  however, have  been  obtained  at  the  Coco  Islands.
The  healthy  dry  season  was  chosen  for  the  opening  of  the  new Settlement,  and  therefore  the  sick-rate  at  first  was  not  noticeable.
Captain  Kyd  arrived  in  the  Settlement  on  the  5th  March,  and  up  to that  time  the  settlers,  with  the  exception  of  jungle  sores,  aggravated by  scurvy,  were  healthy.  He  wrote  in  a  most  sanguine  manner  about the  future  of  the  Settlement,  and  more  artificers  and  labourers  were applied  for,  also  200  convicts.  The  vessels  attached  to  the  Settlement were  employed  in  bringing  turtle  from  Diamond  Island,  rice  and  live- stock from  A  chin  and  the  coast  of  Pedi,  and  cocoa-nuts  from  Car Nicobar.
Fruit  trees  were  imported  from  the  neighbouring  continent  and Sumatra.  Building  and  clearing  went  on  apace,  a  cocoa-nut  plantation was  formed,  a  granary  erected,  and  cover  for  the  whole  Settlement provided  before  the  commencement  of  the  rains.  113  sepoys  and settlers  were  sent  from  Calcutta  to  reinforce  the  Settlement  early in  May,  1793,  and  72  labourers  were  sent  at  the  end  of  the  same month.
About  this  time  Lieutenant  Blair  returned  to  Bombay,  with  a highly  recommendatory  letter  from  the  Governor-General  in  Council  to the  Governor  of  Bombay.  He  had  previously  submitted  a  general chart  of  the  Andamans  and  a  full  report  on  the  subject,  with  a  tabular statement  of  astronomical  observations,  which  are  to  be  found  in  the proceedings  of  the  Council  of  the  31st  May,  1793.  He  does  not consider  the  chart  complete  on  account  of  the  abrupt  inequalities  in
90
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
the  depths,  which  may  have  led  him  to  overlook  certain  hidden  dan- gers. He  comments  on  the  edible  birds'  nest  caves,  noting  the one  at  the  south  end  of  Strait  Island,  which  seems  to  have  then contained  more  nests  than  it  does  now.  (The  birds  are  certainly  not building  as  freely  in  the  Islands  as  they  used  to,  or  we  have  not  dis- covered their  new  nests,  they  having  deserted  the  old  places.)  He thought  the  nests  were  made  of  a  mineral  substance  which  exuded from  the  rock.
On  the  13th  June,  1793,  news  arrived  at  the  Settlement  of  the  war with  Prance,  and  Major  Kyd  had  at  once  to  place  it  in  a  state  of defence.  Fresh  labourers  from  Bengal  arrived.  A  hill  on  Chatham Island  was  chosen  as  the  site  of  a  fort,  as  the  back  was  protected  by the  jungle  and  the  front  commanded  the  Settlement.  The  North front  was  to  have  two  denii-bastions  with  a  gun  in  each,  and  on  the North  and  East  fronts  good  ditches,  and  a  parapet  14  feet  high.  The approach  was  to  be  protected  by  abattis  and  felled  timber.  The vessels  were  to  be  placed  under  the  protection  of  the  fort,  and  a refuse  made  for  the  women  and  children.  Major  Kyd  made  these arrangements  and  then  went  to  Calcutta  to  procure  armament,  rein- forcements, and  supplies,  leaving  the  other  officers  to  carry  out  the work.  He  applied  for  six  12 -pounder  guns,  on  garrison  carriages,  and two  brass  6-pounders,  and  wished  to  have  the  sepoy  detachment  in- creased to  two  full  companies,  a  detachment  of  European  Artillery  to be  ordered  in  readiness,  and  more  labourers.  He  advised  the  arming of  the  vessels  attached  to  the  Settlement,  and  wished  to  give  them  a proportion  of  European  seamen.  The  commanders  of  these  vessels were  granted  commissions  by  the  Governor- General,  corresponding  to those  issued  to  the  commanders  of  country  ships,  since  the  beginning of  the  war.
Major  Kyd's  recommendations  met  with  the  entire  approval  of the  Government,  but  the  reinforcements  were  not  despatched  till  the end  of  the  year.
He,  at  this  time,  took  an  Andamanese  servant  with  him  to  Calcutta,
who   was   presumably  a  man  of  the  North  Andaman  Group  of  Tribes,
nd,  as  we  know  from  the  records  that   friendly  relations  were  n.ot
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
then  established  with  the  people  round  Port   Cornwallis,  the  savage must  have  heeu  in  a  state  of  semi-captivity.
During  Major  Kyd's  absence  Major  Michael  Symes  touched  at Port  Cornwallis  en  route  to  Ava,  where  he  had  been  sent  on  an embassy.  His  account  of  the  Andamans  is  given  below.
On  the  14th  May,  1794,  the  Council  of  the  Governor-General reported  that  "  the  situation  of  Port  Cornwallis  has  of  late  proved very  unfavourable  to  the  health  of  the  settlers,  but  we  entertain hopes  that  the  place  will  become  more  salubrious  in  proportion  as  it is  cleared."
In  April,  1794,  the  Government  sent  five  European  convicts  to Port  Cornwallis,  but  the  Superintendent  declined  to  receive  them, and  they  were  returned  to  Bombay.  The  Governor-General  approved of  this,  and  dirested  that  no  Europeans  should  be  transported.
On  the  22nd  November,  1794,  50  more  native  convicts  arrived from  Bengal.  Fifty  deaths  occurred  during  the  rains  of  1795.
The  following  is  the  Minute  of  the  Board,  dated  the  8th  February, 1796,  abolishing  the  Settlement  at  Port  Cornwallis  :—
"  Considering  the  great  sickness  and  mortality  of  the  Settlement formed  at  the  Andamans,  which,  it  is  feared,  is  likely  to  continue,  and the  great  expense  and  embarrassment  to  Government  in  maintaining it,  and  in  conveying  to  it  supplies  at  the  present  period,  it  appears to  the  Governor-General  in  Council,  both  with  a  view  to  humanity  and economy,  prudent  to  withdraw  it.  He  observes  that  if,  at  the  termi- nation of  the  present  war,  it  should  be  thought  expedient  to  carry  on the  plan  with  vigour,  it  could  be  renewed  with  very  little  disadvan- tage, no  permanent  or  valuable  buildings  having  yet  been  erected, and  there  being  few  stores  of  value  to  remove.  The  expediency  of withdrawing  the  Settlement  admitted,  no  time  should  be  lost,  so  that it  may  be  done  before  the  change  of  the  monsoon.  The  Board  fur- ther observes  that  if  it  could  be  conceived  that  this  temporary  removal from  the  Andamans  could  invalidate  our  claim  to  those  Islands,  were any  foreign  nation  in  the  meantime  to  settle  there  (a  circumstance, however,  which  is  highly  improbable),  the  objection  may  be  obviated by  keeping  a  small  vessel  at  Port  Cornwallis,  to  be  relieved  every
92  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  GELATIONS
six  months.  Resolved,  therefore,  that  the  Marine  Board  be  instruct- ed to  take  immediate  measures  for  the  removal  of  the  convicts  to Prince  of  Wales's  Island,  and  for  bringing  back  the  stores  and  settlers to  Bengal ;  that  they  be  further  instructed  to  make  provision  for keeping  a  small  vessel  at  Port  Cornwallis,  to  be  relieved  every  six months."
This  Minute  was  recorded  in  consequence  of  reports  received  from theAndamans;  the  death  of  Mr.  Surgeon  Reddich;  of  Lieutenant Ramsay  having  left  for  Penang  on  account  of  extreme  ill-health ;  that the  Settlement  continued  so  unhealthy,  there  being  no  fewer  than fifty  deaths  during  the  last  rains  ;  and  that  every  one  was  anxious  to leave,  being  depressed  by  sickness  and  the  climate,  in  spite  of  all  that could  be  done  for  them.
The  Settlement  at  this  time  contained  270  convicts  and  550  free men,  women,  and  children,  including  the  European  artillery  and  the sepoy  guard.  The  convicts,  with  the  provisions  and  stores,  were  sent to  Penang,  the  colonists  with  their  property  were  brought  back  to Bengal,  and  the  Settlement  was  finally  abandoned  in  May,  1796.
It  does  not  appear  that  any  small  vessel  was  kept  at  Port  Corn- wallis, as  proposed.
Major  Kyd's  remarks  on  the  climate  show  that  it  was  the  same then  as  it  is  now.
No  surprise  can  be  felt  at  this  disastrous  end  to  our  first  Settle- ment on  the  Andaraans.  Lieutenant  Blair's  success  in  the  Southern Harbour  had  naturally  led  the  Government  to  conclude  that  the other  harbours  would  be  equally  healthy  and  well  suited  for  settling in.  It  was  unfortunate  that  Commodore  Cornwallis,  who  was  the brother  of  the  Governor-General,  should  have  been  so  much  taken with  the  present  Port  Cornwallis  (though  he,  of  course,  regarded  it from  a  strategical  point  of  view  only),  as  his  word  carried  great weight,  and  caused  the  moving  of  the  Settlement  to  the  Northern Harbour  on  the  12th  November,  1792.  Port  Cornwallis  is,  perhaps, the  most  unhealthy  spot  in  the  whole  of  the  Andaman  Islands,  and was  wisely  avoided  by  Dr.  Mouat  and  his  party  when  they  had  to decide  on  the  best  spot  for  establishing  the  present  Settlement.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  93
The  following  remarks  by  Major  Kyd,  on  the  Andaraanose,  have been  extracted  from  his  Reports  to  the  Government,  now  only  to  be found  in  the  India  Office,  and  are  here  published  :—
"  Lieutenant  Blair  having  brought  here  two  natives  of  the  Anda- man Islands,  I  thought  an  attempt  to  convey  a  sketch  of  their  persons and  manners,  as  far  as  known,  might  not  prove  unacceptable,  at  the period  of  their  falling  to  bo  ranged  among  the  new  acquired  subjects of  the  East  Indian  Company.
"  On  a  first  view  of  the  configuration  of  the  elder  of  the  two,  whom Lieutenant  Blair  conceives  to  have  attained  the  state  of  manhood,  and may  be  considered  not  mucb  differing  from  the  mean  standard,  they probably  fall  to  be  ranged  nest  to  the  Laplanders,  amongst  the lowest  in  stature  of  the  human  race,  the  elder  being  only  4  feet, 7  inches  in  height,  the  other  4  feet,  2  inches.  The  head,  body,  and limbs,  appear  bulky,  fleshy,  and  unmuscular,  the  legs  excepted,  which appear  thin,  gummy,  and  disproportioned  to  the  superstructure,  exhibit- ing while  walking,  less  bone,  or  muscular  action  than  generally  seen.
"  In  their  features  and  complexion  they  approach  the  dark,  oily- coloured  Coffree.  The  pupil  of  the  eye  is  remarkably  round  and prominent,  the  nose  aud  lips  not  quite  so  depressed — Hair  of  the  eye- brows faintly  defined — The  head  covered  with  short,  woolly  hair.  In this  subject  the  chin  is  beardless,  with  short,  depressed  neck,  dark black  complexion,  and  the  offensive  effluvia  characteristic  of  the Guinea  Negro.  (The  Andamanese  have  not  the  Negro  smell. — M.  V.  P.)
"  But  I  understand  there  is  a  great  diversity  in  their  features,  the European  lip  and  aquiline  nose  being  seen,  but  in  all  the  head  is covered  with  woolly  hair,  and  dark  complexion,  indicating  the  possibi- lity of  their  originating  from  different  tribes  of  the  Coffree  nation  ;  if not  the  probability  of  different  dialects,  a  supposition  in  some  degree accounting  for  the  enmity  observed  amongst  the  inhabitant  of  differ- ent parts  of  the  coast.  From  what  has  been  collected  respecting  their manners,  they  fall  to  be  ranked  amongst  the  lowest  yet  discovered  on  the scale  of  civilisation — in  a  word — Man  in  the  rudest  state  of  nature  (?).
A  HISTORY  OF  00 R  RELATIONS
Living  in  the  mildest  climate  under  the  canopy  of  heaven  they appear  strangers  to  the  wants  entailed  by  the  ruder  seasons  or  social compacts,  and  to  experience  no  other  than  that  of  food  in  its  most primitive  and  crude  state,  and  the  instruments  for  providing  it,  Bow and  Arrow,  and  Fishing-nets.  Ignorant  in  the  arts  of  husbandry  and cultivation,  they  derive  their  subsistence  from  the  spontaneous  produc- tions of  the  earth  ;  the  fisby  race  frequenting  their  shores  ;  and  the land  animals  of  which  the  hog,  guana,  rat,  lizard,  and  monkey,  (No. — M.  V.  P.)  have  yet  only  been  discovered ;  and  from  the  prints  of footsteps  on  the  shores,  the  further  probability  of  the  existence  of  the porcupine  only  suspected.  (None. — M.  V.  P.)
"  The  use  of  clothing  is  totally  rejected  by  the  men,  something  ap- proaching the  description  of  the  fig-leaf  having  only  been  seen  among a  few  of  the  women.
"  On  unaccustomed  food  being  presented  them  they  recur  chiefly to  the  organ  of  smelling  for  decision  on  the  adoption  or  rejection, generally  showing  an  aversion  to  all  acid  fruits  and  aliment,  such  as butter-milk  or  seasoned  food.
"  It  is  astonishing  to  see  the  strength  and  exertions  performed  with their  teeth,  standing  in  the  stead  of  many  of  the  artificial  instruments of  mechanism  recurred  to  by  man  in  a  civilised  state.  They  extract nourishment  from  the  root  of  a  species  of  the  Nicobar  bread-fruit tree,  by  expression  with  their  teeth,  converting  the  fibrous  part  into  a substitute  for  fat.  (This  is  not  known  to  the  Andamanese  with whom  we  are  now  on  friendly  terms,  and  must  be  a  peculiarity  of the  Jarawa  tribe  only. — M.  V,  P.)
"  The  taste  of  this  root,  on  trial,  was  found  to  resemble  the  filbert, but  its  application  to  either  purpose  overlooked  by  the  Bengalese. (sic).
"In  drinking  they  apply  their  mouths  to  the  surface  of  the liquid  and  sip  at  intervals.
"  Fire  is  used  in  a  slight  preparation  of  their  food  on  a  kind  of  grid of  bamboo  (this  grid  is  for  keeping  the  cooked  food  on,  not  for cooking  it. — M.  V.  P.)  and  in  striking  fish  during  the  night.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  95
"Their  habitations  are  composed  of  rudely  compacted  branches  of trees,  scarcely  coming  under  the  description  of  huts.
"  In  the  morning  they  rub  their  skins  with  mud,  or  wallow  in  it, like  the  buffalo  (Never. — M.  V.  P.),  to  prevent  the  annoyance  of insects,  daubing  their  hair  either  with  red  ochre  or  cinnabar.  (With red  ochre  among  the  Onge  Group  of  Tribes  only.  Cinnabar  is  not found.— Jf.  V.  P.)
"  Those  in  the  vicinage  of  Port  Cornwallis  (the  Settlement  in  the South  Andaman,  now  known  as  Port  Blair,  is  here  referred  to — M.  V.  P.),  since  they  have  dropped  their  apprehensions  of  hostility or  invasion  of  their  shores  by  the  settlers,  have  only  apparently  been impelled  to  any  intercourse  from  the  occasional  pressure  of  hunger.
"  Of  our  aliments,  the  cocoa-nut,  and  oily  or  greasy  animal  food, proved  the  most  acceptable,  they  rejecting  sugar,  salt,  spirits,  wine, or  clothes,  and  everything  else  which  we  conceive  conducive  to health  or  security  against  the  inclemency  of  the  weather — iron  nails and  instruments  alone  being  coveted.
"  Under  all  this  degrading  situation,  if  judgment  may  be  formed from  an  observance  of  the  behaviour  of  the  present  subjects  (making even  due  allowance  for  the  influence  of  the  change  of  situation  and novelty  of  the  surrounding  objects),  they  appear  remarkably  cheerful ; displaying  much  colloquial  vivacity  in  their  discourse  ;  widely  differ- ent from  the  frigidity  of  disposition  attributed  to  the  American  Indians, apparently  implying  a  greater  share  of  intellectual  sprightliness  than might  be  expected  from  a  subject  endowed  with  the  obtuse  and untutored  organs,  falling  to  the  share  of  man  in  so  rude  a  state. (The  Andamanese  are  anything  but  "  obtuse.  " — M.  V.  P.)
"  As  far  as  judgment  can  be  formed,  under  the  apparent  rapidity  of their  pronunciation,  their  dialect  appears  rather  smooth,  not  guttural, although  some  of  their  words  are  not  easily  articulated.
"  Dancing  and  singing  are  the  only  convivial  amusements  yet  per- ceived amongst  them,  and  in  which  the  women  equally  participate, but  bear  the  greatest  part  of  the  drudgery  in  collecting  food,  repairing to  the  reefs  at  the  recess  of  the  tide,  collecting  shell- iish,  while  the men  are  employed  in  striking  fish  with  the  bow  and  arrow.
Cg  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
"  That  they  are  jealous  of  the  women  has  been  inferred  from  the only  loss  sustained  in  a  boat's  crew  after  having  been  in  habits  of communication,  originating,  it  has  been  suspected,  in  our  people having  attempted  to  debauch,  if  not  offer  violence,  to  some  of  them.
"  In  singing,  their  melodies  are  in  the  nature  of  recitative  and chorus,  not  unpleasing  ;  the  last  note  ending  in  the  octave  above  the key.  (This  is  incorrect. — M.  V.  P.)
"  In  dancing,  they  may  be  said  to  have  improved  on  the  strange republican  dance  asserted  by  Voltaire  to  have  been  exhibited  in England.
"  Ou  danjant  a  la  ronde,  chacun  donne  des  coups  de  pieds  & son  voisin,  et  en  re9oit  de  me1  me."
«'  The  Andamanese  likewise  dance  in  a  round,  each  alternately kicking  and  slapping  his  own  breech  only,  ad  libitum.
"  (This  is  a  rather  incorrect  description  of  a  species  of  dance in  vogue  among  the  Onge  Group  of  Tribes  only. — M.  V.  P.)
"  Further,  they  express  contempt  by  exhibiting  their  posteriors, (this  is  principally  among  the  North  Andaman  Group  of  Tribes. — M.  V.  P.),  and  brandishing  a  certain  member.  (Never. — M.  V.  P.)
' '  How  far  these  may  deserve  being  ushered  to  notice  in  the  Western world,  as  more  congenial  to  the  manners  of  man  in  a  state  of  indis- putable independence,  during  the  present  ferment  of  liberty  than  the processes  now  in  use,  a  la  lanteme,  amongst  the  over  zealous  votaries of  the  Goddess,  the  Governor- General  in  Council  may  determine."
"  The  food  recurred  to  by  them  chiefly  consists  of  shellfish,  of which  the  oyster  (No. — M.  V.  P.),  mussel,  clam,  limpet,  and  periwinkle constitute  the  principal.  Of  the  fishing  utensils  the  bow  and  arrow  is principally  recurred  to,  with  which  they  strike  fish  with  great  ad- dress. They  also  use  large  and  small  nets  for  catching  turtle  and small  fish.
"  Their  embarkations  are  of  the  rudest  kind,  consisting  of  the trunk  of  a  tree,  partly  hollowed  out  by  fire  (Never — M.  V.  P.),  and instruments  of  stone  (No. — M.  V.  P.),  or  rafts  of  bamboo.
"  In  the  social  compact,  it  appears  that  they  have  made  no  ad- vance; a  few  families  uniting  and  occupying  particular  parts  of  the
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  97
shores,   amongst   whom,   it  has  boon  observed,  hostilities  and  discord prevail.
"  Shields  (Dancing-boards,  which  resemble  Crusaders'  Shields. — M.  V.  P.)  and  weapons  of  annoyance  having  been  also  seen  among them,  with  a  mutual  interdiction  of  communication  between  the  re- spective districts ;  but  there  is  no  foundation  yet  discovered  for  consi- dering them  cannibals,  notwithstanding  they  have  been  unequivo- cally handed  down  from  the  remotest  antiquity  under  this  character."
Extract. — Voyage  de  Gaul  Schouten  aux  Indes  Orientales,  Octo- ber, 1669.
"  Les  Isles  de  Nicobar  dans  la  mer  de  Bengale,  qui  y  gissent au  Sud,  et  celles  des  Andamans  qui  y  gissont  au  Nord,  sont des  lioux  dont  on  n'a  la  vue"  qu'en  passant,  n'y  aiant  aucune  espe"- rance  de  profit  a  la  visitor.
"  II  ost  fort  dangereux  de  s'en  approoher  et  d'y  terrir,  parceque, pour  peu  qu'il  fasse  de  brume  cm  de  gros  terns,  on  court  risque  de donner  centre  dos  banes,  ou  d'aller  se  briser  contre  le  rivage.  D'ail- leurs  quand  on  a  eu  ce  malheur,  ceux  qui  croient  s'etre  sauvez  des gens  sauvages  et  brutaux,  qui,  plus  impitoiablos  que  los  ordres  ne les  epargnant  pas.
Us  sont  d'une  fort  grancle  taille,  telle  qu'on  si  figure  celle  de3 petits  giants.  Ce  n'est  pas  pour  les  Chretiens  seuls  qu'ils  ont  de rinhumanite,  c'est  pour  tous  les  autres  hommes  du  monde.  Tous ceux  qui  aiant  fait  naufrage  sur  leurs  c6tes  se  sauvant  sur  le  rivage, y'  sont  aussit6t  attaquez,  environnez,  massacrez,  et  mangez  par  ces barbares  antropophages.
"  L'annee  precedents,  que  les  vaisseaux  Wasp  et  Broioer- shaven  allerent  a  Bangale,  ils  s'approcheraat  trop  de  la  plus  m6ri- dionalo  des  Isles  des  Andamans.  II  faisoit  du  gros  terns  et  de  la brume,  si  bion  que  par  une  nuit  fort  obscure  le  Wasp  echoiia  et porit.  La  plus  grande  partie  de  1'equipago  aiant  nage  jusqu'5,  terre, se  vit  attaquea  par  cas  grands  hommes  sauvages  armez  des  fieches, d'ai  cs,  de  frondes  et  d'assuagies  empoisonnees,  qui  faisent  des  cris effiraians.  Une  partie  de  ces  malheureux  Hollandois  se  sauva  dans les  bois ;  mis  les  autres  furent  tuez  et  mangez  dans  un  festin.
gg  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
"  Jacques  Heinse  Moocker,  Capitaine  de  Vaisseau  avec  qui  j'avois navigue*  deux  ans  a  Ainboine,  a  Buco,  a  Ceram,  a  Galor,  a  Macassar, et  a  Aracan,  fut  a  soixante  ans  un  deceux  qui  leur  servirent  de  curee. II  etoit  alors  Capitaine  du  Browershaven,  et  comme  il  vit  le naufrage  de  sa  conserve,  il  s'en  alia,  non  obstant  le  gros  terns,  jetter 1'ancre  de  long  de  1'isle,  et  aiant  fait  armer  sa  chaloupe,  il  descendit  a terre,  et  delivra  courageusement  le  Capitaine  et  avec  lui  ceux  qui vivoient  encore  de  1'equipage  du  vaisseau  pe"ri,  qui  sortirent  des broussailles,  ou  ils  avoient  cru  devoir  bientot  expirer.
"  Mais  le  genereux  Moocker,  on  escarmonchant  centre  les  sauva- ges,  fut  etendre  mort  d'un  coup  de  fleche  qui  le  parga  et  par  un echange  bien  fatal  pour  lui,  il  leur  demeura  en  proie,  pendant  1'autre Capitaine,  qu'il  avoit  sauve",  aller  rempli  sa  place."
Extract  from  Ritchie's  Survey  of  the  Andaman  Islands,  January, 1771.
"  It  is  generally  believed  in  this  country  that  they  are  cannibals and  eat  one  another,  or  at  least  eat  those  of  their  enemies  whom  they took  or  kill  in  battle.  How  far  this  is  true  I  know  not — certain  it is  that  nothing  in  the  human  shape  can  have  a  more  wild  appearance either  in  person  or  manners."
(The  records  of  this  Surveyor,  which  would  be  of  great  interest, as  he  is  said  by  Lieutenant  Blair  to  have  been  on  friendly  terms  with the  Andamanese,  cannot  now  be  found. — M.  V.  P.)
"  The  Andaman  Islands,  being  clearly  designed  in  Ptolemy's  map under  the  title  of  Fortunate,  while  the  adjoining  cluster  of  Nicobar Islands  are  termed  in  the  same  geographical  tract  "Anthropophagi " (a  mistake,  the  Preparis  Islands  were  "  Fortttnatce,"  and  the Andamans  "Anthropophagi". — M.  V.  P.),  the  latter  now  inhabited  by a  class  of  natives,  not  less  discriminated  from  the  others  in  their external  configuration,  than  by  pacific  civilised  manners,  living under  the  most  patriarchal  primitive  contract,  and  as  far  as  appears never  held  any  intercourse  with  the  Andamanese  although  often attacked  by  the  piratical  Achenese  cruisers,  a  remark  confirmed  from the  imperfect  construction  of  the  embarkations  in  use  amongst  both,
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
being  unsuited  to  traverse  tho  distance  by  which  thoy  aro  separated. (The  Nicobar  canoe  is  very  different  from,  and  much  superior  to,  the Andamanese  canoe. — M.  V.  P.)
"  Tho  uncommon  form  of  the  Bow  used  by  the  natives  of  the Andamans,  from  the  unlikelihood  of  its  occurring  to  such  an  uncivi- lised race,  is  the  only  utensil  among  them,  together  with  some  speci- mens of  pottery  ware,  inferring  that  they  might  have  obtained  them from  some  accidental  communication  with  the  continent ;  and  fur- ther, suggests  the  probability  of  these  islands  having  been  peopled  by the  shipwreck  of  a  vessel  conveying  Coffree  slaves  from  the  shore  of Africa,  for  some  part  of  India,  before  the  doubling  of  the  Cape  of  Good Hope  by  the  Portuguese,  as  handed  down  by  general  tradition  here ; than  the  supposition  of  their  proving  indigenous,  however  counten- anced by  some  late  relations  of  the  coast  of  New  Guinea  being  peopled by  a  similar  race.
"  Of  their  language  so  little  has  been  collected,  from  the  difficulty of  communication,  and  the  freedom  fr^m  restraint  observed  towards such  of  them  as  visited  the  Settlement,  that  the  imperfect  vocabulary hereunto  annexed  (Lieutenant  Colebrookc's,  already  given. — M.  V.  P.),  if  rendered  to  the  present  Crichton  of  the  age  (however accustomed  to  trace  the  affinity  of  any  languages,  and  the  migration  of the  antient  races  of  mankind)  might  probably  prove  a  most  difficult task.
"If  ever  referred  to  Sir  William  Jones,  it  may  not  be  improper  to observe  that  this  vocabulary  has  been  compiled  by  a  North  Briton, and  the  Orthography  corresponding  with  the  Scotch  pronunciation.
"  The  precipitous  rocks  and  cavernous  recesses  composing  part  of the  coast  give  shelter  to  the  birds  forming  the  edible  birds'  nests, an  article  of  commerce  in  the  China  market.  Mr.  Blair  is  of  opinion that  the  nest  is  formed  from  a  kind  of  glutinous  matter  fount! exuding  from  the  crevices  of  particular  caverns  where  these  birds during  nidification  are  observed  to  resort.  This  gluten  at  a  subse« quent  period  undergoing  a  further  decomposition  by  a  petrifactivs process.
o2
100  A  HISTORY  OP  OUB  RELATIONS
"  Whether  this  bird  migrates  has  not  heen  ascertained.  The  period of  their  incubation  takes  place  in  December  and  continues  till May.  Not  more  than  two  small,  white,  spotless  eggs  have  been found  in  their  nests ;  it  has  been  further  supposed  that  they  breed monthly.
"  Off  these  Islands,  the  shore  in  some  places  are  strewed  with  coral rocks,  and  where  not  rocky  are  generally  lined  with  the  mangrove, prickly  fern,  a  species  of  wild  rattan,  and  other  shrubs  coming  under the  description  of  the  Mimosa  Asperata.  The  interior  is  covered  with a  thick  but  generally  accessible  forest,  darkened  by  the  intermixture of  creeper  and  parasite  plants,  of  which,  further  than  the  underwritten list,  the  different  species  have  not  been  ascertained.
Nutmeg. — Two  species,  apparently  both  of  the  uncultivated    kind
described  in  Rumph's  collections.
Plaas. — On  which  the  Muggadooty  silkworm  feeds.  Collected from  the  circumstance  of  the  Bows  of  the Andamanese  being  made  from  the  wood  of  this tree.
Cutch. — Affording  the  extract  forming  the  Terra  Japonica. Boddam. Mango. — (Painted,)     Known  here  under  the  name  of  the  Sunder-
bund,  or  wild  Mango. Coconut. — Very  few. Mangostien. Eumboostien. Ebony.
Dammar  Tree. Wood  Oil  Tree. Cotton  Tree. Timber  Trees.
Poon. — (Red.)     Pit  for  masts  of  great  size.
Soondry.
One  resembling  the  Sattin  wood.
Red  Wood  Tree. — Affording  timber  and  planks  of  vast  size.
Boddam. —  Ditto,  ditto.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANKSK.
A  tree  resembling  the  walnut  in  its  quality. Nicobar  Bread  Fruit,  termed  Mellon. Alexandrian  Laurel. Bamboo,  of  a  bad  quality. Poplar.
And  two  or  tliree  fruit   trees  of  which  two  imperfect   specimens  or descriptions  have  been  obtained  to  ascertain  their  nature.
"  Memorandum  by  the  Officer  of  Engineers  who  brought  the Mellori  from  the  Nicobar  Islands,  in  the  year  1787,  to  Bengal
"  From  the  description  of  the  Bread  Fruit  Tree,  lately  given  in Lieutenant  Blyth's  Voyage  to  the  South  Sea  Islands,  it  certainly differs  little  from  the  species  found  on  the  Island  of  Sumatra  and  the Malabar  coast,  which  as  an  aliment  is  so  far  inferior  to  the  Mellori of  the  Nicobars  as  not  to  bear  comparison.  Indeed,  I  know  of  no potato,  parsnip,  or  any  kind  of  farinaceous  vegetable  that  is  equal to  it,  and  if  it  proves  that  the  tree  affords  in  abundance,  and  like the  coconut  and  plantain  at  all  times  of  the  year,  I  know  of  no country  where  it  would  not  be  a  present.  On  the  Malabar  Coast  the Bread  Fruit  is  propagated  from  the  root,  which  I  observe  also  is  done in  the  Society  Islands.  Subsequent  experience  has  also  shown  in  the Company's  Garden,  that  it  may  be  propagated  with  superior  facility by  layers  taken  off  by  the  Chinese  process.  The  Mellon  is  easily propagated  from  radical  suckers  or  slips  and  are  now  multiplying  fast in  the  Company's  Garden."
(The  Bread  Fruit  Tree  of  the  South  Sea  Islands  is  Artocarpua incisa,  a  very  different  tree  from  Pandanus  Mellori,  the  Bread  Fruit Tree  of  the  Nicobars,  which  is  a  Screw  Pine.  The  bread  which  is made  from  the  pulp  of  the  latter  by  the  Nicobareso  might  be  a  sur- prise to  the  inhabitant  of  any  civilised  country,  but  scarcely  a  very welcome  present.  —  M.  V.  P.)
"  The  soil  of  the  Andamans,  from  the  partial,  if  not  solitary  trial which  has  been  made,  is  equal  to  raising  the  various  productions  of Bengal,  conjointly  with  those  of  the  more  eastern  parts  of  the  Malay Peninsula.
102  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
"  The  interior  part  of  the  Island  rises  to  a  considerable  height,  The mountain  termed  "  The  Saddle  "  by  Navigators  being  seen  at  the distance  of  25  leagues  at  sea.  (No.  20  leagues. — M.  V.  P.)
"Intersected  by  various  ridges  of  mountains,  but  their  direction  or component  strata  unascertained,  further  than  that  some  of  the  lower ranges  bordering  the  coast  exhibit  blue  schistous  strata  at  their  bases, with  Breccia  or  Pudding-stone.
"  Of  the  minerals  little  or  no  information  has  been  obtained  further than  that  some  species  of  white  clay  with  red  ochre,  if  not  cinnabar, are  to  be  found.
"  Of  the  feathered  race  a  species  of  humming-bird,  parrots,  with one  or  two  more  have  only  been  discriminated  as  differing  from  those common  in  Bengal  which  they  equally  possess.
"  Of  Insects.— The  Honey-bee.
"  Of  the  Reptiles. — The  Green  snake  (held  amongst  the  most  dan- gerous by  the  native  of  Bengal),  has  been  seen  in  the  woods,  the centipede  of  ten  inches  long,  and  the  scorpion.
"  Of  the  population  of  these  Islands  but  an  imperfect  estimate  can be  formed,  further  than  it  is  by  no  means  corresponding  with  the extent  of  the  soil,  and  from  the  natives  falling  to  be  ranged  under the  class  Ichthyophagi.  Conjecture  has  been  strengthened,  as  far  as the  Island  has  been  explored,  that  the  population  is  principally confined  to  the  shores,  and  proportionately  greater  or  less  as  they afford  the  resources  of  sustenance.  The  whole  is  computed  not  to exceed  3,000  or  4,000.
(Most  of  Major  Kyd's  remarks  are  derived  from  Lieutenant  Cole- brooke,  who  only  wrote  of  the  Jarawas  in  the  South  Andaman.  Major Kyd  applies  these  remarks  to  the  Chariar  tribe  of  the  North  Anda- man, and  adds  others  from  personal  observation,  though  most  of  the above  would  appear  to  have  been  written  before  he  established  the Settlement  in  Port  Cornwallis,  North  Andaman.  After  writing  it he  took  two  Andamanese  with  him  to  Calcutta,  and  appeared  to  have established  slightly  friendly  relations  with  some  of  the  Chariars,  but no  further  record  of  his  doings  is  to  be  found. — M.  V.  P.)
WITH  THE  ANDAM1NESE.
103
In  the  Calcutta  Monthly  jReyister,  or  India  Eespository  for November,  1790,  pp.  15 — 17,  are,  among  others,  tho  following remarks : —
The  writer  gives  details  about  the  appearance  of  the  Andaman Islands  which  agree  with  the  facts  at  present  known,  and  also  enlarges on  their  healthiness.  He  mentions  the  Andamanese  as  a  strong* robust  set  of  Coffrees,  much  resembling  in  appearance  and  mode  of living  what  Cooke  describes  to  us  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  South- West  part  of  New  Zealand.  lie  notes  that  they  never  use  hooks  and lines  for  catching  fish,  and  from  this  argues  a  want  of  intelligence  in the  people.
He  considers  fish  their  staple  diet,  and  adds  that  when  that  fails them  they  roam  in  the  woods  in  the  quest  of  wild  hogs  and  rats,  which are  by  no  means  plenty,  and  only  a  dernier  ressort,  when  the people  are  much  pressed  by  hunger.  They  are  supposed  to  be  the descendants  of  slaves  wrecked  on  the  coast  of  the  Andamans,  from Portuguese  ships,  when  the  Portuguese  had  a  Settlement  at  Pegu  ; and  they  are  very  shy  and  hostile.
I  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  the  name  of  the  writer  of  the above,  but  it  is  evidently  a  "  reporter's  account, "  gathered  from some  person  who  had  visited  the  Southern  Settlement  at  that  time. I  am  not  aware  that  Captain  Cooke  describes  any  of  tho  inhabitants o£  New  Zealand  as  Negritos,  but  tho  suggestion,  probably  made  in  all good  faith  and  ignorance  then,  is  of  interest  now,  when  we  have  reason to  think  that  the  race  who  inhabited  New  Zealand  before  the  ad  vent 'of the  Maories  were  Negritos  allied  to  the  Tasmanians  and  Andamanese.
It  will  be  seen  that  the  fact  of  the  Andamanese  not  using  hooks and  lines  to  catch  fish  bad  at  last  been  noted,  but  the  writer  was wrong  in  supposing  that  the  wild  pigs  were  not  a  staple  food  of  the Andamanese.  Tho  idea  of  the  aborigines  being  descendants  of  ship- wrecked slaves  seems  to  have  been  a  favourite  one  in  the  last  century.
The  following  account  of  the  Andamans  was  written  by  Major Michael  Symes,  who  was  only  in  Port  Cornwallis  for  a  few  days  in 1794,  when  on  his  way  to  Burma,  and  who  must  have  derived  his
1Q4  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
information  from  the  resident  officials  of  the  Settlement.  They  had only  been  moved  to  Port  Cornwallis  a  short  time  before  and  knew little  of  the  aborigines  there .  The  description  of  them  is  taken  from their  knowledge  of  the  Jarawa  tribes,  which  was  acquired  in  the Southern  Harbour.
Major  Michael  Symes,  "Embassy  to  Ava."     Chapter  I.
"  At  eleven  o'clock  on  the  5th  of  March,  we  hauled  our  wind  and stood  into  Port  Cornwallis,  on  the  East  coast  of  the  North  Andaman Island,  and  at  one,  our  ship  cams  to  an  anchor,  a  quarter  of  a  mile from  the  shore.  On  landing  we  were  received  by  Captains  Ramsay and  Stokoe,  (Colonel  Kyd,  the  Governor,  being  absent),  with  the kindest  hospitality,  which  was  equally  extended  to  the  captain  and officers  of  the  ship,  and  continued  to  every  individual  belonging  to the  mission,  during  the  time  that  we  remained  their  guests.
"  Tue  Settlement  in  Port  Cornwallis  is  not  situated  on  the  principal island,  but  on  a  smaller  one  within  the  harbour,  named  by  the English,  Chatham  Island  ;  the  utmost  length  of  which  does  not exceed  two  miles,  and  the  breadth  little  more  than  half  a  mile  :  the southern  extremity  terminates  in  a  narrow  neck  of  land,  fordable  at low  water  to  the  main.
"  The  Andaman  Islands  are  a  continuation  of  the  Archipelago  that extends  from  Cape  Negrais  to  Atchein  Head,  stretching  from  10°  32' to  13"  40'  north  latitude,  and  from  90°  6'  to  92°  59'  east  longitude. What  has  been  considered  as  the  Great  Andaman,  is  the  most  nor- thern, about  one  hundred  and  forty  miles  in  length,  and  not  exceed- ing twenty  broad.  A  separation,  or  strait,  however,  has  lately,  owing to  a  fatal  accident,*  been  discovered  in  this  island,  which,  in  fact
*  In  the  month  of  February,  1792,  a  vessel  was  freighted  from  Madras  to  carry  stores  to  His Majesty's  fleet  at  Andaman  ;  the  master  being  unacquainted  with  the  harbonr,  sent  a  small  boat in  the  afternoon  to  explore  an  opening  in  the  land,  that  appeared  like  the  entrance ;  the  boat stood  in,  it  fell  dark,  and  she  was  swept,  by  a  rapid  current,  through  a  channel  that  divided  the main  island  and  opened  into  the  Bay  of  Bengal.  The  north-east  monsoon  prevailed  with  i;reat violence  :  unable  to  work  against  stream  and  wind,  the  boat  was  borne  to  leeward,  and  driven irresistibly  into  I  ho  Indian  Ocean.  Eighteen  day  afterwards  she  was  picked  up  by  a  French  ship near  the  equinoctial  line.  The  crew  consisted  of  two  Europeans  and  six  lascars  ;  and,  shocking to  relate,  when  relieved  by  the  French  ship,  three  of  the  lascars  had  been  killed  and  eaten  by their  companions.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  ]Q5
divides  it  into  two,  and  opens  a  clear  passage  into  the  Bay  of  Bengal. The  first  settlement  of  the  English  was  made  in  the  year  1791,  near the  southern  extremity  of  the  island,  in  a  bay  on  the  east  side ;  but it  was  afterwards  removed  in  179  J,  by  advice  of  Admiral  Cornwallis, to  the  place  where  it  is  now  established.  The  original  object  of  the undertaking  was  to  procure  a  commodious  harbour  on  the  east  side  of the  Bay,  to  receive  and  shelter  His  Majesty's  ships-of-war,  during the  continuance  of  the  north-east  monsoon ;  it  was  also  used  as  a place  of  reception  for  convicts,  sentenced  for  transportation  from Bengal.
"  No  writer  of  antiquity  has  transmitted  a  distinct  account  of  the Andamans;  they  were  included  by  Ptolemy,  together  with  the Nicobars  and  lesser  islands,  in  the  general  appellation  of  Imulce bonce  Fortunes,  and  supposed  by  him  to  be  inhabited  by  a  race  of Anthropophagi.*  The  mild  inoffensive  Nicobarians  have  long  since been  acquitted  of  the  horrid  imputation  ;  but  the  different  form, disposition,  and  habits  of  the  few  wretched  savages  who  wander  on the  shores  of  the  Andamans,  may  have  given  ground  for  a  supposition that  human  flesh  has  been  eaten  by  them ;  if  so,  it  probably  arose more  from  the  impulse  of  excessive  hunger,  than  from  voluntary choice  ;  a  conclusion  that  well  authenticated  instances  of  the  distress they  at  times  endure  appear  to  authorize.
"  In  the  evening  we  walked  round  the  grounds  that  had  been cleared,  making  a  circuit  of  little  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  mile, partly  along  the  beach,  and  partly  by  a  path  leading  through  heaps of  brushwood,  and  the  trunks  of  huge  trees  that  had  been  recently felled.  A  small  garden,  diligently  tilled,  produced  but  a  scanty crop  of  Indian  vegetables.  A  shallow  soil,  impregnated  with  leaves and  decayed  brushwood,  washed  down  by  the  mountain  streams, proved  at  first  unfavourable  to  cultivation;  the  pains,  however,
*  Eusebins   Kenaudot,   in  his  translation  of  the  account  given  by  two  Mahomedan  traveller!, who  journeyed  eastward,  in  the  ninth  century,  says  :  "  beyond  these  two   islands  (probably  the Nicobars)  lies  the  sea  of  Andaman.     The  people  on  this  coast   eat   human    flesh   quite  raw ;  their complexion  is  black,  their   hair   frizzled,   their  countenance  and  eyes  frightful,  their  feet  ars  very large,  almost  a  cubit,  and  they  go  quite  naked."
106
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
which  had  been  bestowed,  seemed  likely  in  the  end  to  overcome  this discouragement.  The  situation  of  the  Settlement  on  the  side  of  a  hill rising  abruptly  from  the  verge  of  the  sea,  although  calculated  to avoid  the  unwholesome  effects  of  stagnant  waters,  was  yet  at  times attended  with  great  inconvenience,  owing  to  the  impetuosity  of  the torrents.
"  Notwithstanding  the  colony  had  been  established  on  its  present site  little  more  than  sixteen  months,  the  habitations  of  the  command- ant and  officers,  and  the  huts  of  the  inferior  classes,  were  rendered extremely  comfortable.  The  first  constructed  of  stone  and  planks, the  latter  of  mats  and  clay,  thatched  with  leaves  of  the  rattan, or  covered  with  boards.  The  surgeon  had  a  separate  dwelling assigned  to  him,  and  there  was  likewise  a  commodious  mess-room. The  number  of  inhabitants  altogether  was  about  700,  including  a company  of  sepoys  as  a  guard  over  the  convicts,  and  a  defence  to  the Settlement.
"A  situation  more  picturesque,  or  a  view  more  romantic,  than  that which  Chatham  Island  and  Cornwallis  Harbour  present,  can  scarcely be  imagined :  land-locked  on  all  sides,  nothing  is  to  be  seen  but  an extensive  sheet  of  water,  resembling  a  vast  lake,  interspersed  with (••mall  islands,  and  environed  by  lofty  mountains  clothed  with  impene- trable forests.  The  scenery  of  nature,  in  this  sequestered  spot,  is uncommonly  striking  and  grand.
"All  that  voyagers  have  related  of  uncivilised  life  seems  to  fall  short of  the  barbarism,  of  the  people  of  Andaman.  The  ferocious  natives of  New  Zealand,  or  the  shivering,  half-animated  savages  of  Terra  del Fuego,  are  in  a  relative  state  of  refinement  compared  to  these islanders.*
"  The  population  of  the  Great  Andaman,  and  all  its  dependencies, does  not,  according  to  Captain  Stokoe,  exceed  2,000  or  2,500  souls;
*  Mr.  Marsden,  in  his  excellent  History  of  the  island  of  Sumatra,  is  of  opinion,  that  the  inha- bitants of  the  Batta  country,  in  the  northern  pirt  of  that  island,  eat  human  flesh  ;  and  the authorities  on  which  he  grounds  his  belief  seem  to  authenticate  the  fact ;  it  does  not,  however, appear,  that  human  flesh  was  substituted  by  them  in  place  of  ordinary  food,  but  eaten  rather as  a  barbarous  ceremony,  to  indicate  revenge  on  their  enemies,  or  abhorrence  of  crimes the  only  victims  being  prisoners  taken  in  war,  or  capital  convicts,
WITH  THR  ANDAMANESE.
107
these  are  dispersed  in  small  societies  along  the  coasts,  or  on  the  lessor islands  within  the  harbour,  never  penetrating  daoper  than  the  skirts of  the  forests,  which  hold  out  little  inducement  for  them  to  enter,  as they  contain  no  animals  to  supply  them  with  food.  Their  solo  occu- pation seams  to  be  that  of  climbing  rooKs,  or  roving  along  the  margin of  the  soa  in  quest  of  a  precarious  moil  of  fish,  which  during  the  tem- pestuous season  they  often  seek  for  in  vain.
"  The  Andamaners  are  not  more  favoured  in  the  conformation  of their  bodies  than  in  the  endowments  of  their  mind.  In  stature  they seldom  exceed  five  feet ;  their  limbs  are  disproportionately  slender, their  bellies  protuberant,  with  high  shoulders  and  large  heads  ;  an  I, strange  to  find  in  this  part  of  the  world,  they  are  a  degenerate  race of  Negroes  with  woolly  hair,*  flat  noses,  and  thick  lips  ;  their  eyes  are small  and  red,  their  skin  of  deep  sooty  black,  whilst  their  countenances exhibit  the  extreme  of  wretchedness  :  a  horrid  mixture  of  famine  and ferocity.  Thay  go  quite  naked,  and  are  insensible  of  any  shame  from exposure.
"  Two  young  women,  allured  by  temptation  of  fish,  were  secured and  brought  on  board  a  ship  at  anchor  in  the  harbour  :  the  captain treated  them  with  great  humanity ;  they  soon  got  rid  of  all  fear  of violenc3,  except  what  might  be  offered  to  their  chastity,  which  they guarded  with  unremitting  vigilance  :  although  they  had  a  small apartment  allotted  to  themselves,  and  had  no  real  cause  for  apprehen-
*  It  is  a  matter  of  much  curiosity  to  discover  the  origin  of  a  raoe  of  people  so  widely  differ- ing not  only  from  all  the  inhabitants  of  that  vast  continent  in  the  bosom  of  which  the  Island  of Andaman  is  embayed,  but  also  from  the  natives  of  the  Nicobar  Islands,  which  are  immediately contiguous  to  it.  Hitherto  the  inquiries  of  travellers  seem  to  have  produced  no  satisfactory conclusion:  some  have  supposed  th*t  a  Portuguese  ship,  early  in  the  16th  century,  laden  with slaves  from  Mnsambique,  had  been  cast  on  these  shores,  and  that  the  present  Andainaners  are  the descendants  of  such  as  escaped  drowning.  This  conjecture  is  proved  to  be  grossly  erroneous,  from tlie  account  given  by  the  two  Mahommedan  travellers,  long  anterior  to  the  navigation  of  thoso seas  by  Europeans.  The  Arabians,  however,  who  sailed  on  the  Indian  Ocean  so  early  as  the 7th  century,  and  who  not  only  explored  the  continent  of  India  'as  far  as  the  Chinese  sea,  but likewise  gained  a  knowledge  of  most  of  the  eastern  islands,  might,  by  an  accident  similar  to  that which  has  been  asoribed  to  the  Portuguese  vessel,  have  peopled  Andaman  with  its  present  Negro race.  It  deserves  remark,  that  on  the  continent  of  India  extrj,  G-angem,  figures  of  Boodh,  or Bndhoo,  the  Gaudma  of  thu  Birinans  and  Siamese,  are  ofteu  seen  with  the  characteristic  hair  and features  of  the  Negro.
rl
108  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
sion,  one  always  watched  while  the  other  slept ;  they  suffered  clothes  to be  put  on,  but  took  them  off  again  as  soon  as  opportunity  offered,  and threw  them  away  as  useless  incumhrances.  When  their  fears  were over  they  became  cheerful,  chattered  with  freedom,  and  were  inex- pressibly diverted  at  the  sight  of  their  own  persons  in  a  mirror ;  they were  fond  of  singing,  sometimes  in  a  melancholy  recitative,  at  others in  a  lively  key  ;  and  often  danced  about  the  deck  with  great  agility, slapping  their  posteriors  with  the  back  of  their  heel.  Wine  and spirituous  liquors  were  disagreeable  to  them ;  no  food  seemed  so palatable  as  fish,  rice,  and  sugar.  In  a  few  weeks,  having  recovered strength  and  become  fat,  from  the  more  than  half-famished  state  in which  they  were  brought  on.  board,  they  began  to  think  confinement irksome,  and  longed  to  regain  their  native  freedom,
"  In  the  middle  of  the  night,  when  all  but  the  watchman  were asleep,  they  passed  in  silence  through  the  captain's  cabin,  jumped  out of  the  stern  windows  into  the  sea,  and  swam  to  an  island  half  a  mile distant,  where  it  was  vain  to  pursue  them,  had  there  been  any  such intention;  but  the  object  was  to  retain  them  by  kindness,  not  by compulsion,  an  attempt  that  has  failed  on  every  trial.  Hunger  may (and  these  instances  are  rare)  induce  them  to  put  themselves  in  the power  of  strangers,  but  the  moment  that  want  is  satisfied,  nothing short  of  coercion  can  prevent  them  from  returning  to  a  way  of  life more  congenial  to  their  savage  nature.  The  few  implements  they use  are  of  the  rudest  texture  ;  a  bow  from  four  to  five  feet  long,  the string  made  of  the  fibre  of  a  tree,  or  a  slip  of  bamboo,  with  arrows  of reed,  headed  with  fish-bone,  or  wood  hardened  in  the  fire,  is  their principal  weapon.  Besides  this,  they  carry  a  spear  of  heavy  wood, sharply  pointed,  and  a  shield  made  of  bark,  to  defend  themselves from  the  assaults  of  their  enemies ;  for  even  these  poor wretches  have  rights  to  assert  and  dignities  to  maintain ; necessity  has  taught  them  an  expert  management  of  their arms,  on  which  they  rely  for  subsistence :  happily  for  them, their  numerous  bays  and  creeks  abound  with  fish,  which  they  shoot and  spear  with  surprising  dexterity.  They  are  said  also  to  use  a small  hand  net,  made  of  the  filaments  of  bark ;  t  jjf  fish  when  caught
WITH  THE  ANDAMANF.SE.  109
is  put  into  a  wicker  basket,  which  they  carry  on  their  backs.  Having kindled  a  fire  they  throw  the  food  on  the  coals,  and  devour  it  half broiled.  A  few  diminutive  swine  are  to  be  found  in  the  skirts  of  tho forests,  and  among  tho  mangrove  thickets  in  tho  low  grounds  ;  but these  are  very  scarce,  and  are  probably  the  progeny  of  a  stock  left by  former  navigators.  "When  a  native  has  the  good  fortune  to  slay one,  he  carefully  preserves  the  skull  and  teeth  to  ornament  his  hut. They  cross  the  bays,  and  go  to  fish  either  in  canoes  formed  of  a hollow  tree,  or  on  rafts  of  bamboo,  which  they  direct  by  paddles. Their  habitations  display  little  more  ingenuity  than  the  dons  of  wild beasts ;  four  sticks  stuck  in  the  ground,  are  bound  together  at  the top,  and  fastened  transversely  by  others,  to  which  branches  of  trees are  suspended ;  an  opening  is  left  on  one  side,  just  large  enough  to admit  of  entrance  :  leaves  compose  their  bed.  Being  much  incom- moded by  insects,  their  first  occupation  in  a  morning  is  to  plaistec their  bodies  all  over  with  mud,  which,  hardening  in  the  sun,  forms  an impenetrable  armour ;  they  paint  their  woolly  heads  with  red  ochre and  water :  when  thus  completely  dressed,  a  more  hideous  appear- ance is  not  to  be  found  in  human  form.
"  Their  religion  is  the  simple,  but  genuine  homage  of  nature,  to  the incomprehensible  ruler  of  the  universe,  expressed  in  adoration  to  the sun,  as  the  primary  and  most  obvious  source  of  good ;  to  the  moon as  the  secondary  power ;  and  to  the  genii  of  the  woods,  the  waters, and  the  mountains,  as  inferior  agents.  In  the  spirit  of  the  storms they  confess  the  influence  of  a  malignant  being ;  and,  during  the south-west  monsoon,  when  tempests  prevail  with  unusual  violence,  they deprecate  his  wrath  by  wild  choruses,  which  they  chant  in  small congregations  assembled  on  the  beach,  or  on  some  rock  that  over- hangs the  ocean.
"  Of  a  future  state  it  is  not  known  that  they  have  any  idea,  which possibly  arises  from  our  imperfect  means  of  discovering  their opinions ;  it  affords,  however,  satisfactory  reflection  to  find,  among the  most  ignorant  and  barbarous  of  mankind,  a  confirmation  of  the great  and  pleasing  truth  that  all  reasoning  existence  acknowledges  a God-  The  half-humanized  Andamaner  invokes  the  luminaries  that
1 10  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
lend  him  light ;  and  in  that  simple  and  spontaneous  praise,  he  offers tip  the  purest  devotion  of  an  unenlightened  mind.
"  Although  the  principal  food  of  the  Andamaners  consists  of  fish, yet  they  eagerly  seize  on  whatever  else  presents  itself ;  lizards  > guanas,  rats,  and  snakes  supply  a  change  of  repast.  Birds  are  not numerous,  and  seldom  come  within  reaoh;  doves,  parroquets,  and  the Indian  crow,  are  the  most  common  :  hawks  are  sometimes  seen hovering  over  the  tops  of  the  trees ;  but  they  are  only  temporary visitors  from  the  neighbour  ing  continent  :  a  few  aquatic  birds frequent  the  shores ;  amongst  these  are  the  kingfisher,  a  sort  of curlew,  and  the  small  sea-gull.  Within  the  caverns  and  recesses  of the  rocks  is  found  the  salangane,  or  Hirundo  Nidis  Ednlibus,  de- scribed by  Monsieur  Poivre  :  this  bird,  whose  nest  produces  a  high price  in  China,  is  perfectly  black,  and  resembles  a  small  martin ;  its nest  is  thickly  glazed  with  a  mucilaginous  substance,  which  the  bird collects  from  the  sea  blubber,  and  is  said  to  swallow,  and  afterwards emit  from  the  stomach  ;  it  is  prized  by  the  Chinese  for  its  supposed medicinal  and  restorative  qualities.
"  The  vegetable  diet  of  the  Andamaners  consists  of  the  natural produce  of  the  woods,  in  which  the  researches  of  Europeans  find little  that  is  palatable  or  nutritious ;  the  fruit  of  the  mangrove  is principally  used,  having  often  been  found  in  their  deserted  habitations steeping  in  an  embanked  puddle  of  water.  As  they  have  no  pot*  or vessel  that  can  bear  the  action  of  fire,  they  cannot  derive  much  ad- vantage from  such  esculent  herbs  as  the  forests  may  contain  ;  indeed, their  extenuated  and  diseased  figures  too  plainly  indicate  the  want  of wholesome  nourishment ;  unhappily  for  them,  the  cocoanut,  which thrives  in  the  utmost  luxuriance  in  the  neighbouring  isles,  is  not  to be  found  here  ;  they  are  extremely  fond  of  it ;  whenever  a  nut  was left  in  their  way  by  the  settlers,  it  was  immediately  carried  off  with much  apparent  satisfaction.  Captain  Stokoe,  who  constantly  resided on  the  island,  disappointed  in  his  attempts  to  establish  a  social  inter-
*  The  fragments  of  earthern  vessels,  mentioned  by  Mr.  Colehrooke,  were  probably  brought from  the  Nicobars,  or  from  the  continent,  by  the  boats  that  often  visit  the  Andamans  for  the purpose  of  taking  the  nests  before  mentioned.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
course,  endeavoured  to  alleviate  their  wants  by  sending,  as  often  as circumstances  would  admit,  small  supplies  of  victuals  to  their  huts, which  were  always  abandoned  on  the  approach  of  his  people,  but resorted  to  again  when  they  had  withdrawn.  A  party  of  fishers belonging  to  the  Settlement  enticed  a  woman  by  the  allurement  of food,  to  come  so  close  that  she  was  made  a  prisoner  ;  instead  of relieving  her  hunger,  they  proceeded  to  offer  violence  ;  the  cries  of the  poor  creature  brought  a  numerous  troop  of  savage  friends  to  her assistance,  who  rushing  out  of  the  thickets,  attacked  and  killed  two of  the  yet  more  savage  aggressors.  Thoir  bodies  were  afterwards found  disfigured  in  a  shocking  manner.
"  A  coasting  party  one  day  discovered  a  man  and  a  boy  stretched on  the  beach,  apparently  in  the  last  stage  of  famine  ;  they  were  con- veyed to  the  Settlement  :  unfortunately,  every  effort  of  humanity  failed to  save  the  man,  but  the  boy  recovered,  and  is  now  in  the  service  of Colonel  Kyd,  at  Calcutta,  where  he  is  much  noticed  for  the  striking singularity  of  his  appearance.
"  The  language  of  the  Andamaners  has  not  been  discovered  to  pos- sess the  slightest  affinity  to  any  that  is  spoken  in  India,  either  conti- nental or  islandic.  Captain  Stokoe  informed  me,  that  what  he  heard was  not  at  all  harsh  or  disagreeable  to  the  ear  ;  their  songs  are  wildly melodious,  and  their  gesticulation,  whilst  singing,  is  extremely  impas- sioned. This  is  one  among  the  many  evidences  to  prove  that  poetry is  coeval  with  the  language  of  man.
"  The  only  quadrupeds  seen  on  the  island  are  hogs,  rats,  and  the ichneumon  ;  the  guana  also,  of  the  lizard  tribe,  may  be  reckoned  in this  class  ;  these  prove  very  destructive  to  poultry  :  there  are  several species  of  snakes  and  scorpions.  Labourers,  whilst  clearing  away the  underwood,  were  frequently  bitten  ;  but  in  no  instance  did  the bite  prove  mortal,  although  the  patients  commonly  fell  into  violent convulsions  ;  eau-de-luce  and  opium  were  the  remedies  in  most cases  administered.
"  During  the  prevalence  of  the  North-East  monsoon,  fish  is  caught in  great  abundance,  but  in  the  tempestuous  season  it  is  difficult  to  be procured  ;  grey  mullet,  rock  cod,  skate,  and  soles  are  among  the  best  ; oysters  have  been  found,  but  in  no  great  quantity.  The  shores
HISTORY  OF  OTJR  RELATIONS
abound  in  a  variety  of  beautiful  shells,  gorgonias,  madrcporas,  murex, and  coteries,  with  many  other  kinds,  of  which  Captain  Stokoe  had made  a  curious  and  valuable  collection.
"  There  are  several  sorts  of  trees  on  the  island  ;  the  Ficus  Reliyiosa or  banyan  tree,  the  almond  tree,  the  oil  tree,  that  grows  to  a  great height,  from  which  a  very  useful  oil  is  thus  produced.  A  horizontal incision  being  made  in  the  trunk,  six  or  eight  inches  deep,  a  chip fourteen  or  fifteen  inches  long,  is  cut  at  right  angles,  and  the  surface of  the  incision  being  hollowed  and  filled  with  live  coals,  the  turpen- tine, or  wood  oil,  exudes  copiously  from  the  top  of  the  wound.
"  The  penaigre  tree  is  also  found,  and  is  well  adapted  for  the  knees of  ships  ;  and  the  iron  tree  of  stupendous  size,  whose  timber  almost bids  defiance  to  the  axe  of  the  wood-cutter  ;  the  red-wood  which makes  beautiful  furniture,  little  inferior  to  fine  mahogany.  Besides these,  there  are  numberless  creepers  and  rattans  which  surround  the stems  of  the  larger  trees,  and,  interwoven  with  each  other  form  so thick  a  hedge  that  it  is  impossible  to  penetrate  far  into  the  forests, unless  by  the  slow  and  laborious  process  of  cutting  a  road.
"  The  first  settlers  in  an  uninhabited  land  have  not  only  to  contend against  natural  obstacles,  and  the  want  of  several  necessary  comforts of  life,  but  must  likewise  encounter  the  effects  of  an  unwholesome atmosphere  ;  no  country  thoroughly  agrees  with  the  human  consti- tution until  it  is  cleared  and  cultivated.  The  new  colonists,  notwith- standing every  possible  attention  was  paid  to  the  preservation  of  their health,  became  sickly  ;  they  were  afflicted,  during  the  four  dry months,  December,  January,  February,  and  March,  with  scurvy. This  complaint,  however,  was  owing  to  a  change  of  food  and  a  want of  vegetable  diet  :  as  soon  as  the  rains  commenced,  it  mitigated  and quickly  disappeared,  but  it  gave  way  to  a  dreadful  successor,  the  inter- mittent fever  and  ague,  which  baffled  all  power  of  medicine.  An induration  and  enlargement  of  the  spleen,  a  disease  well  known  in India  by  the  name  of  Boss,  was  generally  its  concomitant.  The cause  of  these  fevers  being  local,  could  not  be  remedied.  Situated in  the  full  sweep  of  the  south-west  monsoon,  and  the  clouds  being obstructed  by  high  mountains,  the  island  is,  for  eight  months  in  the
WITH  THE  ANDAMANE8B.
113
year,  washed  by  incessant  torrents.  According  to  a  meteorological tahle  kept  by  Captain  Stokoe,  there  appears  to  have  fallen  in  seven months,  98  inches  of  water,  a  quantity  far  exceeding  what  I  had  ever hoard  of  in  any  other  country."*
(The  notes,  as  well  as  the  text  in  the  above  account,  are  by  Major Symes.)
Remarks. — Major  Symes  is  wrong  in  his  dates ;  the  Settlement  in the  Southern  Harbour  was  established  in  1789,  and  removed  to  the Northern  Harbour  in  1792.
It  would  appear  that  the  idea  of  making  the  Settlement  a  Penal Colony  was  first  entertained  when  it  was  moved  to  the  Northern Harbour.
As  I  have  shown  above,  Ptolemy  is  not  responsible  for  the  Jnsulao Bonce  Fortunes.
I  ana  unable  to  understand  how  the  idea  of  the  Andamanose  being frequently  in  a  state  of  distress  from  hunger  arose.  It  is  certainly unfounded.
The  true  character  of  the  Nicobarese,  who,  however,  claim  to  have been  educated  in  evil  by  the  Malays,  was  fully  disclosed  in  the succeeding  century,  when  they  were  found  to  be  anything  but  "  mild and  inoffensive."
There  are  some  remnants  of  buildings  on  the  mainland  on the  south  side  of  the  harbour,  south  of  Chatham  Island,  which appear  to  mark  the  spot  where  Major  Symes  landed,  as  he  speaks of  a  Settlement  on  the  side  of  a  hill  rising  abruptly  from  the verge  of  the  sea,  which  corresponds  to  this  place,  but  not  to  the remains  on  the  north  end  of  Chatham  Island.
It  is  evident  that  our  settlers  had  no  knowledge  of  the  Eromtaga tribes,  and  it  is  remarkable  that  people  living  for  months  in  the  islands should  have  the  idea  that  the  jungle  contained  no  animals  to  supply the  aborigines  with  food.
[An  extract  of  Lieutenant  Colebrooke's  vocabulary  is  attached  in  the  original  as  a  specimen of  the  language  of  the  islands,  which,  referring  as  it  does  to  the  JfCrawa  tribe  of  the  Sonth Andaman  principally,  must  have  been  very  useful  in  the  North  Andaman.— M.  V.  POSTMAN.]
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
Major  Symes  was  much  at  fault  in  his  description  of  these savages.
They  are  not  a  degenerate  race  of  any  kind,  and  are  wanting  in Negro  characteristics.  Their  eyes  are  neither  especially  small,  nor red,  and  the  reason  why  they  are  supposed  to  have  been  in  constant state  of  famine,  I,  as  I  have  said,  cannot  understand.
The  dance  described  resembles  that  of  the  Onge  Group  of  Tribes, but  I  have  seen  something  a  little  like  it  in  the  North  Andaman. Major  Symes  does  not  say  in  which  harbour  the  young  women  were caught.
The  "spear  made  of  heavy  wood,"  and  "the  shield  made  of bark,  "  are  absolutely  unknown  to  the  Andamanese.  The  mention of  the  rafts  of  bamboo  shows  that  some  of  the  information  was  about the  Southern  Harbour  tribes,  and  the  account  of  the  mode  of  paint- ing confirms  this  ;  probably  little  had  been  seen  of  the  North  Anda- manese. The  first  settlers  would  appear  to  have  been  too  busy  for anthropological  research.  The  paragraph  on  the  religion  of  the Andamanese,  is,  as  might  be  expected,  almost  entirely  incorrect.  To investigate  this  subject  required  a  more  intimate  knowladge  of  the Andamaness  language  than  any  one  at  that  time  possessed,  and  the Andamanese  do  not  readily  discuss  it  with  any  stranger,
Snakes  are  not  eaten,  except  by  the  firemtaga  tribe  of  the  North Andaman,  of  whom  I  have  shown  the  settlers  had  no  knowledge  ; possibly  lampreys  are  meant.  Hawks  are  permanent  residents  in  the Andamans,  not  "temporary  visitors  from  the  neighbouring  conti- Dent."
The  edible-birds'  nest  building  swift  is  black  and  white,  and  not "perfectly  black  ;"  and  the  marketable  variety  of  nest  is  made  entirely from,  not  merely  "  glazed  with,  "  mucilage.
Major  Symes  should  not  have  attempted  to  correct  Lieutenant Colebrooke,  who  was  perfectly  right  in  saying  that  the  Audamauese had  pottery  of  their  own.
This  narrative  shows  that  the  boy  whom  Major  Kyd  took  to Calcutta  was  a  North  Andamanese  ;  the  state  of  famine  in  which he  was  found  was  probably  merely  a  resultant  from  disease,  and  it  is
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
115
possible  that  some  epidemic  liacl  been  introduced  by  the  settlers among  the  aborigines.  lie  would  probably  have  been  better  de- scribed as  weakened  and  exhausted  by  sickness,  as  the  Andamanose, when  seriously  ill,  waste  away  to  mere  skeletons.
As  regards  Captain  Stokoe's  opinion  of  the  music  of  the  Anda- manese,  I  can  only  say  that  tastes'differ.
By  the  "ichneumon"  Major  Symes  may  have  meant  tho Paradoxurus.
One  last  word  as  regards  the  cannibalism.  Andamanese  mur- derers will  drink  the  blood,  and  eat,  with  their  pork,  the  breast  flesh of  their  victims,  but  these  people  are  regarded  by  the  other  Anda- manese as  more  or  less  insane.  All  the  tribes  of  the  Great  Andaman have  the  custom  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  of  burning  the  dead bodies  of  their  enemies,  and  the  neighbouring  A.r-yduto  tribes  accuse the  hostile  firemtagas  of  the  North  Andaman  of  eating  human  flesh, though  I  have  never  found  a  person  who  was  an  eye-witness  of  their having  done  so.  The  Andamanese  look  on  the  practice  with  horror, but  it  is  evident  that  they  know  of  it  from  their  accusing  people  they dislike  of  doing  it.  Such  facts,  however,  do  not  justify  a  sweeping charge  of  cannibalism  against  the  whole  race.
A  HISTOEY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
CHAPTER  V.
Andamanese  taken  to  Penang  in  a  Junk  after  a  fight —  Mr.  J  B.  Rodyk's  accounts Rendezvous  of  the  British  Fleet  in  Port  Cornwallis  in  1824— Mr.  J.  B.  Alexander's visit  to  the  Little  Andaman — Mr.  Piddington's  visit  to  Landfall  Island — Malcolm's account — Dr.  Heifer's  murder  by  the  Andamanese — Account  of  the  wrecks  of  the British  ships  Briton  and  Runnymede  on  the  Archipelago  Islands  of  the  Andamans — Jilr.  Quigley's  account — Settlement  on  the  Coco  islands— Wreck  of  the  Emily —Wreck  of  the  Flying  Fish.
APTEB.  the  closing  of  the  Settlement  in  Port  Cornwallis  in  1796, the  Andamans  seem  to  have  been  left  alone  for  some  years.  Doubtless wrecks  occurred  on  the  coasts,  but  we  have  no  record  of  them,  and  the Malays  seem  to  have  resumed  their  slave-trading  there,  which  they only  abandoned  after  the  present  Settlement  was  opened.
About  1819  a  Junk  manned  by  a  mixed  crew  of  Chinese  and Burmese  went  to  the  Andamans  to  collect  trepang.  While  they  were lying  about  two  miles  from  the  shore,  engaged  in  the  collection,  eight or  ten  Andamanese  swam  off  towards  them.  When  close  by,  the savages  fired  several  flights  of  arrows,  wounding  four  of  the  Chinese who  were  not  expecting  an  attack.  The  Burmese,  however,  pursued  the Andamanese,  who  swam  away,  and  with  some  difficulty,  owing  to  the habit  of  the  Andamanese  of  avoiding  pursuit  by  swimming  under  the Avater  for  considerable  distances,  and  coming  to  the  surface  in  a different  direction  from  the  one  where  they  might  be  expected  to appear,  caught  two  of  them,  who  were  taken  to  Penang.
These  captives  were  an  elderly  man  and  a  boy,  and  a  curious detail  noticed  about  the  former  was,  that  while  on  board  ship  the boy  shaved  his  head  with  a  piece  of  a  broken  plate.  The  man  died of  cholera  while  on  his  way  to  Calcutta,  but  the  boy  lived  for  some time  in  Penang  in  the  service  of  Captain  Anderson  of  the  Bengal Army,  and  his  son,  Mr.  Anderson,  of  the  Penang  Civil  Service.  He was  tractable  and  docile,  acquired  a  good  colloquial  knowledge  of Malay  and  Urdu,  and  might  have  done  well  but  that  he  took  to  drink and  died  of  delirium  tremens.
WITH  THE  ANIHMAXESE.
The  only  other  authentic  case  of  Andamanese  having  been  taken away  from  the  Islands,  which  I  have  been  able  to  obtain,  is  the following.
Mr.  J.  B.  D.  Eodyk,  an  old  pensioner  of  tho  Penang  Settlement, states  :  —
"  The  only  instance  I  remember  of  people  from  the  Andainans being  brought  to  Penang,  was  in  the  years  between  1838  and  1841. A  family  consisting  of  a  man,  woman,  and  two  children,  were  brought over  from  there  to  this,  whether  as  slaves  or  not  I  could  not  say,  but they  were  left  in  the  custody  of  the  Police.  The  children  were  sent to  the  Boys'  and  Girls'  Free  Schools,  the  girl  was  called  Mary Andaman,  and  the  boy  Friday  Andaman.  The  man  and  the  boy  a few  years  after  died  of  cholera,  and  the  woman  soon  after  died  of small-pox.  When  the  girl  cann  to  the  age  of  fourteen  she  was removed  from  the  school  by  T.  G.  Mitchel,  Head  Clerk  of  the  Police Court  and  Court  of  Requests,  to  serve  in  his  family  as  an  ayah,  where she  remained  many  years.  When  she  left  that  family  I  was  told  she went  to  Malacca  and  served  a  lady  there  as  an  ayah,  and  when  she loft  her  she  went  down  to  Singapore  and  settled  there,  and  opened  a girls'  school  for  native  children  but  whether  she  is  still  living  (1895) I  do  not  know."
The  above  will  show  that  the  Andamanese  are  by  no  means  of such  degraded  intellects  as  people  would  have  us  believe.  The  wo  • men  especially  are  capable  of  a  good  deal  of  education,  and  are  able to  fend  for  themselves  in  foreign  lands.  Further,  similar  cases,  which will  be  described  later  on,  have  occurred  during  the  last  twenty  years.
There  were  Andamanese  slaves  at  the  Court  of  Siam  until  a  recent date,  and  probably  also  at  other  Courts  in  India,  Burmah,  and  the Malay  Peninsula.
The  British  fleet  was  appointed  to  rendezvous  in  Port  Cornwallis in  1824,  before  proceeding  to  the  first  Burmese  War.
The  vessels  appear  to  have  been  there  from  between  the  25th  and 30th  of  April,  as  they  successively  arrived,  to  the  5th  of  May,  when they  all  departed.  The  delay  was  owing  to  the  want  of  water,  some
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
of  the  ships  from  Madras  having  only  four  days'  supply  in  hand,  and Captain  Marryat  is  mentioned  as  having  done  good  work  by  the  ener- getic manner  in  which  he  collected  water  from  the  streams  and  sup- plied the  ships.  No  mention  is  made  of  the  aborigines,  and  it  is probable  that,  frightened  by  the  number  of  ships  and  people  assem- bled, they  hid  in  the  jungle.
I  obtain  the  following  extract  containing  an  account  of  a  visit paid  to  the  Little  Andaman  Island  in  November,  1825,  from  "  Travels from  India  to  England  ;  comprehending  a  visit  to  the  Bnrman  Em- pire, and  a  journey  through  Persia,  Asia  Minor,  European  Turkey, etc.,  in  the  years  1825-26.  By  James  Edward  Alexander,  Esq.,  Lieut., late  His  Majesty's  13th  Light  Dragoons,  and  attached  to  the  suite  of Colonel  Macdonald  Kinneir,  K.L.S.,  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  the Court  of  Teheran."
Mr.  Alexander  left  Madras  on  the  16th  of  October,  1825,  for Rangoon,  on  board  of  the  Hon'ble  Company's  Transport  Earl  Kellie, and  after  passing  the  North  and  South  Sentinel  Islands,  he  anchored off  Ekiti  Bay  at  the  North-  West  of  the  Little  Andaman  on  the  12th of  November,  the  vessel  being  short  of  water.  He  states  :—
"  This  island,  unlike  the  Great  Anlaman,  is  upon  a  level  with the  water's  edge  (At  the  northern  end  only.  —  M.  V.  I3.)  :  it  is  covered with  a  very  lofty  jungle,  and  is  of  coral  formation.  (It  is  not.  — M.F~.P.)  The  length  is  twenty-  five  miles,  the  breadth  fifteen.  (The extreme  length  is  twenty-six  and  a  half  miles,  and  the  extreme  breadth is  sixteen  miles.  —  M.V.P.)  We  saw  a  light  on  the  shore,  brought  up off  the  North-  West  point,  and  anchored  in  eight  fathoms  and  a  half at  two  miles  and  a  half  distance  from  the  land.
"  The  next  morning,  at  daylight,  the  chief  mate  and  myself  left the  vessel  in  one  of  the  cutters,  intending  to  search  for  water.  We had  six  Bengal  Lascars  on  board,  armed  with  muskets,  besides  the tyndal  or  coxswain,  who  was  a  Malay.  In  pulling  towards  the  shore, we  observed  on  the  beach  a  woman  and  child,  who  appeared  to  be collecting  shell-fish  :  on  perceiving  the  boat  approaching  they  ran into  the  jungle.  We  discovered  a  small  sandy  bay  (which  I  took  the
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
liberty  of  christening  after  the  name  of  our  ship)  with  coral  reefs running  out  from  both  extremes,  over  which  a  tremendous  surf  was breaking  :  the  water  inside  Avas  perfectly  smooth.  (This  was  probably Ekiti  Bay,-  where  I  also  first  landed  in  March,  1886.  —  M.y.F.)  An- choring the  cutter  a  few  fathoms'  length  from  shore,  and  leaving a  couple  of  hands  in  her,  we  landed  with  the  remainder  of  the  crew, and  proceeded  along  the  beach  towards  the  north-west  point,  in  search of  two  runs  of  water  mentioned  by  Horsburgh  in  his  Directory. (These  are  not  known.  —  J/.F.P.)  "We  had  not  gone  far  when,  at  an angle  of  the  jungle  which  covers  the  island  to  within  a  few  yards  of the  water's  edge,  we  came  suddenly  upon  a  party  of  natives,  lying  on their  bellies  behind  the  bushes,  armed  with  spears,  arrows,  and  lon_r bows,  which  they  bent  at  us  in  a  threatening  manner.  The  Lasc- as  soon  as  they  saw  them,  fell  back  in  great  consternation,  levelling their  muskets,  and  running  into  the  sea  towards  the  boat.  It  was with  great  difficulty  we  could  prevent  the  cowardly  rascals  from firing  :  the  tyndal  was  the  only  one  who  stood  by  the  chief  mate  and myself.  We  advanced  within  a  few  paces  of  the  natives,  and  made signs  of  drinking,  to  intimate  the  purpose  of  our  visit.  The  tyndal salaamed  to  them,  according  to  the  different  Oriental  modes  of  saluta- tion ;  he  spoke  to  them  in  Malay,  and  other  languages  ;  they  returned no  answer,  but  continued  crouching  in  their  menacing  attitude, pointing  their  weapons  at  us  wherever  we  turned.  I  held  out  my handkerchief  towards  them,  but  they  would  not  come  from  behind the  bushes  to  take  it.  I  placed  it  upon  the  ground,  and  we  retired in  order  to  allow  them  to  pick  it  up  :  still  they  did  not  move.
"  I  counted  sixteen  strong  and  able-bodied  men  opposite  to  us, many  of  them  very  lusty;  and  further  on  six  more.  They  were very  different  in  appearance  from  what  the  natives  of  the  Great Andaman  are  described  to  be,  namely,  a  puny  race.  The  whole  party was  completely  naked,  with  the  exception  of  a  stout  man,  nearly six  feet  in  height  (?),  who  was  standing  up  along  with  two  or  three women  in  the  rear  ;  he  wore  on  his  head  a  red  cloth  with  white  spots. They  were  the  most  ferocious  and  wild-looking  beings  I  oversaw. Their  hair  was  frizzled  or  woolly  ;  they  had  flat  noses,  with  small  red
12Q  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
eyes  (  ?  ).  Those  parts  of  their  skin  which  were  not  besmeared  with mud  (to  defend  them  probably  from  the  attacks  of  insects)  were  of a  sooty  black  colour ;  their  hideous  faces  seemed  to  be  painted  with  a red  ochre.  (They  only  paint  their  hair  with  red  ochre  now. — M.P.P.) I  may  here  remark,  that  the  natives  of  the  Andamans,  who  are decidedly  a  negro  race,  differing  widely  from  the  inhabitants  of  the neighbouring  continent,  are  supposed  to  be  the  descendants  of  the survivors  of  an  Arab  slave  ship  wrecked  on  one  of  the  islands  some centuries  ago.  The  Chinese,  who  occasionally  resort  to  these  islands to  collect  the  edible  swallows'  nests  and  beche  de  mer,  affirm  that  they are  anthropophagi.  It  is  certain  that  part  of  the  crews  of  several junks,  who  have  lately  fallen  info  their  hands,  were  never  heard  of.
"  At  this  juncture,  the  other  cutter,  with  two  or  three  of  the  offi- cers on  board,  neared  the  beach ;  and  observing  what  was  going forward,  they  called  to  us  to  retire  a  short  distance  and  allow  the tyndal  to  go  up  and  speak  to  the  savages,  as  they  might  be  afraid  of Europeans.  We  accordingly  fell  back  to  the  water's  edge,  and  having desired  the  tyndal  (who  evinced  no  signs  of  fear)  to  strip,  in  order to  convince  them  he  was  unarmed,  he  approached  the  natives  within a  few  paces,  and  offered  them  handkerchiefs,  making  at  the  same time  signs  of  drinking  ;  but  upon  his  attempting  to  advance  closer they  drew  their  bows  in  a  menacing  manner.  Seeing  this,  we  called him  off  ;  and  not  knowing  how  to  act  in  this  emergency  without advice  from  the  ship  (as  we  had  been  directed  not  to  molest  the natives),  both  cutters  returned.  Upon  reporting  what  had  occurred, a  subaltern's  party  was  ordered  to  accompany  us.  We  left  the  ship again  in  the  four  boats,  with  the  water -casks,  and  a  party  of  pioneers to  fill  them,  and  landed  at  the  same  place  as  before.  Not  seeing  any- thing of  the  natives,  we  proceeded  along  the  beach  towards  the southward.  Upon  turning  a  point  we  discovered  a  hut  on  the  edge  of the  jungle;  approaching  it,  we  found  it  to  be  about  fifteen  feet  in height,  of  a  conical  shape,  and  thatched  with  rattan  leaves  to  within a  foot  and  half  of  the  ground,  leaving  just  room  to  crawl  in underneath.
"  The  floor  inside  was  strewed  with  leaves,  and  there  were  several
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
cots,  or  raised  sleeping-places,  consisting  of  four  stakes  driven  into  the ground,  on  which  was  fixed  a  bamboo  grating.
"  Ranged  round  the  walls  were  the  smoked  skulls  of  a  diminutive species  of  pig.  Erom  the  roof  was  suspended  a  piece  of  red  and  white chequered  cloth,  which  seemed  to  be  of  Madras  manufacture.  In conical  baskets  there  were  pieces  of  jack  fruit,  with  a  nut  resembling a  chestnut,  and  several  roots.  In  a  corner  I  found  several  large mangroves.  At  a  fire,  the  following  shells  were  roasting  ;  the  green murex  tribulus,  trochns  telescopium,  cypraea  caurica,  and  several varieties  of  mussel.  The  drinking  cups  were  Nautili.
"  The  weapons  were  a  bow,  from  six  to  seven  feet  in  length, wLich  is  bent  with  the  feet,  the  archer  sitting  on  the  ground  (It  is not.  —  M  .  V.  P.)  -,  and  a  hand  bow  of  four  feet.  The  strings  were  made of  the  dark  red  fibres  of  a  tree  ;  the  arrows  were  three  and  four  feet in  length,  the  upper  part  of  a  very  hard  white  wood,  inserted  in  a stock  of  cane,  so  as  to  quiver  in  the  wound.  (Not  at  all  ;  the  cane shaft  is  for  the  sake  of  lightness.  —  M.  F.P.}
"  Tlie  soldiers  shot  several  of  them  at  a  tree  :  they  penetrated  a couple  of  inches  into  the  solid  timber,  and  it  required  the  joint strength  of  two  men  to  pull  them  out,  and  even  then  the  points  were not  injured.  Several  arrows  were  found  with  two,  three,  and  four prongs.  The  hand-nets  were  formed  of  black  filaments  of  bark. (No  ;  of  a  fibre.  —  M.F.P.)  In  one  of  the  baskets,  carefully  wrapped up  in  a  cloth,  wore  the  head  of  a  harpoon  with  two  barbs,  a  Malay chopping  knife,  and  several  spike-nails  and  ring-bolts.  These  last  wore probably  from  the  American  ship  Dove,  which  was  wrecked  here several  years  ago.  We  saw  no  idols  of  any  description,  nor  canoes  or rafts.
"  Naturally  concluding  that  there  was  water  near  the  hut,  we penetrated  into  the  entangled  jungle  in  the  rear  of  it,  consisting  of dammer  trees,  red-wood,  the  Alexandrian  laurel,  aloes,  ground  rattans, many  convolvuli,  and  a  very  lofty  and  straight  tree,  about  twelve feet  in  girth,  the  wood  of  which,  if  not  too  heavy,  would  answer admirably  Cor  masts.  Having  advanced  about  thirty  or  forty  yards from  the  beaou,  we  came  to  a  pool  of  good  water  ;  but  its  position
122
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
being  inconvenient,  we  were  looking  for  another,  when  we  observed our  people  left  in  charge  of  the  boats  in  considerable  alarm,  and  mak- ing signs  to  us  that  there  was  danger  in  the  jungle.  Advancing towards  the  spot  at  which  they  were  pointing,  we  discovered  a  party of  sixty  or  seventy  of  the  natives  waiting  in  ambush  our  approach. "We  went  towards  them  in  order  to  induce  them  to  shew  us  another pool.  So  little  intention  had  we  of  molesting  or  injuring  them,  that we  had  brought  with  us  several  looking-glasses,  cloth,  and  baubles  to give  them.  However,  we  had  no  sooner  got  within  fifteen  yards  of them  than  we  were  assailed  with  a  shower  of  arrows,  which  struck several  of  us.  I  received  a  scratch  in  the  leg  which  lamed  me  for several  days  after.  We  immediately  extended  the  files  to  skirmishing order,  and  returned  with  a  round  of  musketry,  which  killed  and wounded  several  of  them.  Fixing  bayonets,  we  then  charged  them  ; but  they,  well  knowing  the  intricacies  of  the  jungle,  and  being  ex- tremely nimble,  succeeded  in  not  only  effecting  their  escape,  but  also in  carrying  off  the  disabled  of  their  party.  We  were  brought  up  by a  deep  pool,  and  saw  them  making  off  on  the  other  side,  shouting '  Yahun,  Yahun.'
"  After  this  encounter  we  continued  our  march  along  the  beach, and  discovered  another  pool  of  very  good  and  sweet  water  imme- diately opposite  the  vessel,  and  just  within  the  skirts  of  the  jungle. Having  sent  for  the  water  casks,  and  hoisted  a  Jack  at  the  pool, (being  a  preconcerted  signal  to  those  on  board),  we  left  half  the  party there,  and  proceeded  with  the  remainder  along  a  path  into  the  jungle, expecting  that  it  would  lead  to  a  village  where  we  might  get  live stock  ( ! ).  We  advanced  about  a  couple  of  miles  without  seeing any  more  huts,  or  natives,  and  no  quadrupeds  of  any  sort.  The  wood into  which  we  penetrated,  and  in  which  the  bugle  alone  kept  us  to- gether, was  one  of  the  most  gloomy  and  dismal  that  can  possibly  be conceived  :  it  was,  indeed,  Nemus  atrum  horrenti  umbra.
"  The  trees  were  of  great  height,  in  many  places  thickly  inter- woven with  rattans  and  bushrope.  The  sunbeams  being  unable  to penetrate  the  entangled  foliage,  the  atmosphere,  in  consequence,  bore the  semblance  of  twilight.  The  broad  boughs  hung  rich  with  heavy
WITH  THE  AXDAMANESE.
dew-drops,  and  the  air  was  loaded  with  a  damp  and  pestilential vapour,  occasioned  by  the  rotting  twig*,  leaves,  and  fruit,  with  which the  swampy  ground  was  thickly  strewo  I.  The  death-like  stillness was  occasionally  interrupted  by  a  solitary  parrot  winging  its  noisy flight  overhead  ;  but  owing  to  the  luxuriance  of  our  vei^etable  canopy it  was  almost  impossible  to  gain  even  an  imperfect  view  of  him. Numerous  snakes  were  observed  stealing  along  amongst  the  bushes. From  several  we  had  narrow  escapes  :  those  we  succeeded  in  killing were  all  furnished  with  poisonous  fangs,  and  many  bore  a  striking resemblance  to  the  coluber  pr  ester,  or  viper,  but  generally  they  were spotted.
"Tired  with  our  exertions,  we  returned  to  the  watering  pool; and  having  rolled  the  casks  up  to  it,  we  sat  down  to  a  slight  refection previous  to  commencing  the  filling.  Whilst  busily  engaged  with our  repast,  a  strong  party  of  the  natives  stole  down  upon  us,  and threw  in  a  shower  of  arrows,  which  killed  one  and  severely  wounded three  of  the  soldiers.  We  quickly  formed,  charged  them,  killed  and wounded  several,  and  continued  skirmishing  with  them  till  sunset  ; for  they  made  several  desperate  attempts  to  cut  off  the  pioneers engaged  in  filling,  and  it  required  the  greatest  alertness  to  keep  the:n off.  At  last,  the  pioneers  having  completed  their  task,  we  gave them  a  parting  volley,  and  pulled  off  from  Kellie  Bay  for  the  ship- But  a  strong  current  at  that  time  setting  to  the  North-  East,  at  the rate  of  four  knots  an  hour,  we  found  that,  instead  of  being  able to  gain  the  vessel,  we  were  drifting  fast  out  to  sea  ;  we  therefore anchored  the  water-boats,  and  the  two  others  having  gone  alongside, the  ship's  anchor  was  weighed,  and  dropping  down  to  the  long-boat, and  cutter,  she  was  brought  up  in  thirteen  fathoms,  and  by  midnight we  got  on  board,  after  a  hard  day's  work,  and  laden  with  hows, arrows,  shells,  etc.  During  the  night  the  savages  collected  from all  parts  of  the  island,  and  kept  shouting  and  yelling  in  defiance  on the  beach  ;  but  having  got  what  we  wanted,  we  did  not  humour them  by  a  second  visit.
"  Our  present  connection  with  the  Burman   Empire,   which  will
lead  to  frequent   intercourse   with    that   country   by   sea,    renders
Bit
124  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
it  highly  desirable  that  some  attempts  should  he  made  to  con- ciliate the  natives  of  the  Andamans.  The  Little  Andaman  would be  a  convenient  watering  placej  besides  affording  abundant  materials for  refitting  or  building  ships.  Under  existing  circumstances,  a  visit to  this  Island  is  extremely  hazardous  as  the  foregoing  details  will prove."
The  above  most  interesting  account  is  especially  valuable  as  it  is the  only  one  we  have  of  a  visit  to  the  Little  Andaman  Island.
It  is  difficult  to  fix  the  spot  where  the  party  landed,  but  it  was either  at  Bumila  Creek,  T6kyui  Bay,  or  Ekiti  Bay.  If  it  had  been either  of  the  two  former,  Bumila  Creek  and  Jackson  Creek  would probably  have  been  mentioned,  and  I  am,  therefore,  inclined  to  believe that  they  landed  on  the  shore  in  Ekiti  Bay,  met  the  Palala'nkwe's there,  then  walked  round  the  point  to  T6kyui,  where  the  fights  took place  with  the  T6kyui  and  Ndchuge  people.
As  regards  the  conduct  of  the  party  towards  the  savages,  their contempt  for,  and  disregard  of,  them,  and  their  prompt  punishment of  their  attack,  the  account  would  appear  to  be  typical  of  the  attitude of  passers-by  towards  the  Andamanese  at  this  time.
The  remarks  about  the  long  bow  are  interesting,  as  showing  that this  bow,  now  only  used  by  the  Tarawa  tribe  of  the  South  Andaman, and  the  firemtdga  Onges,  was  then  in  common  use  among  the  Ong^s on  the  coast ;  (it  may  have  been  the  original  form  of  bow  used  by this  Group  of  Tribes,  and  have  been  slowly  discarded  in  favour  of  the s  mailer  bow,)  and  it  draws  the  link  between  the  Jarawa  and  the  Onge Tribes  closer.  There  would  seem  to  have  been  accounts  of  wrecks  of Chinese  Junks  on  the  Andamans  at  this  time,  and  the  wreck  of  the Dove  appears  to  have  been  well  known,  but  I  cannot  find  any  records of  the  subject.
Mr.  Alexander's  concluding  remarks  regarding  the  possibility  of utilising  the  Little  Andaman  in  preference  to  the  other  Islands  of  the Andaman  Group,  would  probably  not  have  been  made  had  he  seen the  other  Islands  with  their  magnificent  harbours.
The  late  Mr.  Piddin  gton  mentions  that  he  was  once  anchored  off
•WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  J25
Landfall  Island  (at  the  Northern  end  of  the  Andaman  Group),  and saw  a  number  of  savages  round  a  fire  on  the  beach.  On  landing,  he found  a  human  body  on  the  fire,  too  much  charred  for  identification. It  was  nearly  reduced  to  a  cinder,  and  therefore  could  not  have  been intended  for  food.
If  it  really  was  a  human  body  it  can  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact that  the  North  Andaman  Group  of  Tribes  burn  the  dead  bodies  of their  enemies  and  of  strangers.
The  date  of  Mr.  Piddington's  visit  is  not  known,  but  it  was  prob- ably about  1830.
In  Malcolm's  "  Travels  in  Southern  Asia  "  he  mentions  having passed  the  Andamans  on  the  12th  of  February,  1836,  going  through the  Coco  Channel.  He  merely  repeats  the  old  stories  about  the Andamanese,  showing  that  he  knew  nothing  of  Blair  and  Colebrooke's accounts,  and  he  did  not  see  the  aborigines,  or  land  on  the  island.
Dr.  Heifer,  a  Russian  geologist,  visited  the  islands  in  1839,  in the  hope  of  finding  gold,  and  was  murdered  by  the  aborigines  just north  of  Port  Cornwallis.
His  act  in  going  almost  alone  among  these  savages  to  search  for minerals  was  foolhardy,  and  could  only  have  ended  as  it  did.
The  following  account  of  the  wrecks  of  the  ships  Briton  and Runnymede,  during  the  night  of  the  llth  of  November,  1844,  on John  Lawrence  Island,  in  the  Archipelago  Group  of  the  Andaman Islands,  is  taken  from  the  Journal  published  in  the  Englishman  news- paper of  Calcutta,  in  January,  1845.
The  authors  of  the  Journal  are  believed  to  have  been  the  Chief Officer  of  the  Briton  and  one  of  the  officers  of  the  80th  Regi- ment ;  and  the  original  is  in  diary  form,  and  is  somewhat  carelessly written.  The  account  in  the  Journal  has  been  preserved  as  far  as possible,  only  necessary  alterations  and  such  additions  as  are  required to  elucidate  the  narrative  being  made.
As  will  be  seen,  the  occurrence  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable known  in  the  history  of  wrecks :  on  account  of  the  extraordinary meeting  of  the  two  ships,  both  bound  for  the  same  port,  and  having
126  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
sailed  from  opposite  sides  of  the  globe ;  from  the  fact  that,  had  they not  been  wrecked  so  close  together,  and  each  been  able  to  supply  the wants  of  the  other,  the  loss  of  life  would  probably  have  been  con- siderable; from  the  fact  that  in  the  wrecks  themselves  no  livos  were lost,  and  that  the  casualties  from  sickness,  etc.,  while  the  party  re- mained on  the  Atidamans,  were  so  few,  and  finally,  which  alone would  make  it  desirable  that  the  narrative  should  be  more  widely known,  on  account  of  the  admirable  conduct  of  all  on  board.
The  women  and  children  seem  to  have  given  no  trouble,  and  hard- ly any  mention  is  made  of  them  in  the  account.
An  account  of  the  wrecks  of  the  British  ships  Briton  and  Runny- mede,  which  were  driven  ashore  on  the  Andaman  Islands  by  a  cyclone during  the  night  of  the  llth  of  November,  1811.  Compiled  from the  Journal  of  survivors  who  had  sailed  in  the  Briton,  from  Sydney New  South  Wales.
On  the  morning  of  the  12th  of  August,  1844,  Her  Majesty's  80th Regiment,  about  1,000  strong,  inarched  out  of  Sydney  Barracks  to embark  for  Calcutta,  in  the  following  order  :
The  Head-Quarters  and  Fhnk  Companies,  with  Lt. -Colonel  Baker in.  command,  embarked  in  the  ship  Uoyal  Saxon.
Numbers  1  and  4  Companies,  with  Major  Naith  in  command,  em- barked in  the  ship  Lloyds.
Numbers  2,  3,  and  6  Companies,  Avith  Major  Bunbury  in  com- mand, embarked  in  the  ship  Briton.
Numbers  7  and  8  Companies,  with  Major  Num  in  command,  em- barked in  the  ship  Enmore.
His  Excellency,  Sir  M.  C.  O'Connell,  K.C.B.,  the  Commander  of of  the  Forces,  and  Colonel  of  the  Regiment,  attended  by  his  Staff, rode  at  the  head  of  the  Corps  and  accompanied  it  to  the  place  of  em- barkation. This  having  been  completed,  the  several  ships  hauled  out into  the  stream,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  15th  got  under  wei^h
WITH  THE  AXDAMANESB.  127
together,  and  the  regiment  hade  adieu  to  the  colony,  where  they  had been  stationed  for  over  seven  years.
After  leaving  Sydney  Heads  we  had  haffling  winds  and  dirty  wea- ther, and  did  not  make  Torres  Straits  till  the  25th  August,  the  four ships  rounding  the  Breaksea  Spit  within  an  hour  of  each  other.  The passage  through  the  Straits,  at  all  times  tedious,  occupied  18  days.
On  the  llth  of  September  we  all  lay  to  off  Booby  Island,  each ship  sending  a  boat  on  shore  to  communicate  with  the  Post  Office. From  the  13th,  we  had  light  winds  until  the  28th,  when  we  anchored in  Kupang  Roads,  Timor  Island,  where  we  found  the  Royal  Saxon and  Lloyds,  which  had  arrived  a  few  hours  before  us.  Her  Majesty's Sloop-of-war  Hoyaliat  was  also  there.  Having  filled  up  with  water, and  taken  in  fresh  provisions,  fruits,  etc.,  we  again  stood  to  sea  on the  afternoon  of  the  2nd  of  October,  in  company  with  the  Royalist and  Lloyds,  the  Royal  Saxon  having  taken  her  departure  on  the previous  evening.
As  the  occurrences,  now  about  to  be  related,  refer  alone  to  the Sriton,  I  may  here  give  some  short  account  of  that  ship  and  the details  of  the  troops  on  board.
The  Briton  was  a  North-American-built  barque  of  776  tons measurement,  and  registered  Al  at  Lloyds.  She  was  on  her  second yoyage,  was  commanded  by  Captain  Bell,  and  had  a  crew  of  34  men and  boys.  The  troops  on  board  consisted  of  three  companies  of  the 80th  Regiment,  under  the  command  of  Major  Bunbury,  with  Cap- tains Bert,  Sayers,  and  Montgomery ;  Lieutenants  Leslie  and  Free- man ;  Ensigns  Hunter  and  Coleman  ;  and  Assistant-Surgeon  Gamniie  ; the  total  being  9  officers,  12  sergeants,  4s  drummers,  293  rank  and file,  35  women,  and  43  children.  The  vessel  thus  had  on  board  a  total of  431  souls.
The  day  after  leaving  Kupang  we  lost  sight  of  the  Lloyds ;  the Royalist  was  still  in  company  with  us.  On  the  5th  October,  the season  being  so  far  advanced,  the  Master  decided  on  taking  the  inner passage,  and  bore  up  for  the  Straits  of  Lombok,  the  Royalist,  wliich was  proceeding  to  Singapore,  agreeing  to  keep  with  us.
128  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
In  the  Java  Sea  we  had  light  winds  and  fine  weather,  and  reach- ed Singapore  on  the  22 ad  October,  having  parted  company  with the  Royalist  a  few  days  before  in  the  Carimata  Passage.
After  leaving  Singapore,  we  were  wind  bound  for  several  days before  we  got  into  the  Straits  of  Malacca ;  here  we  had  variable  winds with  occasional  squalls,  one  of  which  sprung  our  main  yard.  The following  day  it  was  securely  fished.  Several  vessels  of  different  sizes were  in  company  with  us.  On  passing  the  town  of  Malacca  a  native boat  came  off  with  fruits,  .vegetables,  jungle  fowls,  etc.
As  we  drew  to  the  Northward,  and  got  clear  of  the  Straits,  we naturally  expected  to  fall  in  with  the  North-East  Monsoon,  but  the wind  kept  variable  and  unsteady,  not  blowing  for  two  days  together then  from  the  same  quarter.
On  Friday,  the  8th  of  November,  the  wind,  which  had  been  from the  North-East,  veered  round  to  the  West-South-West.  We  were in  North  Latitude,  by  observation,  9°-ll'.
On  Saturday  the  9th,  the  weather  was  cloudy  with  a  threatening appearance,  and  we  were  unable  to  take  an  observation  to  ascertain our  position.  The  wind  remained  West-South-West  in  the  after- noon, and  the  weather  being  still  threatening  we  took  in  the  royals, flying  jib,  and  gaff  topsail.  At  5  P.M.  on  this  date  the  Sympiesometer commenced  to  fall,  and  we  had  small  rain  with  heavy  gusts  of  wind.
The  top-gallant  sails  and  spanker  were  furled,  and  we  double  reefed the  fore  top-sail,  single  reefed  the  main  top-sail,  and  set  the  reefed main-sail.  At  10  P.M.,  the  weather  clearing  a  little,  we  again  set the  top-gallant  sails  and  spanker.  At  midnight,  as  it  was  cloudy  and there  were  strong  gusts  of  wind  accompanied  by  small  rain,  we  took in  the  top-gallant  sails,  the  jib,  and  the  spanker.
At  1  A.M.  on  Sunday  morning  the  10th,  as  the  gale  was  increasing, we  furled  the  main  and  fore-sails,  and  close  reefed  the  top-sails.
At  4  A.M.,  there  were  heavy  squalls,  and  the  spanker  and  gaff top-sail  blew  out  of  their  gaskets,  nor  were  we  able  to  secure  them, so  they  were  cut  away  to  save  the  masts.
By  daylight  the  squalls  were  terrific  ;  the  fore-sail  blew  out  of  its gaskets  and  was  cut  away,  and  the  parrel  of  the  main  top-gallant  yard
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
broke  and  left  the  yard  swinging  by  the  haulyards.  The  ship  was brought  to  the  wind,  with  her  head  to  the  South-West,  at  10  A.M.  :  it  was still  blowing  heavily,  and  we  endeavoured  to  wear  ship  in  order  to  get her  on  the  opposite  tack.  The  helm  was  put  hard  up,  and  all  hands were  sent  forward  into  the  weather  fore  rigging  with  a  tarpaulin,  at the  same  time  an  attempt  was  made  to  hoist  the  jib  and  fore  topmast stay-sail,  both  of  which  were  blown  to  pieces,  the  vessel  refusing  to pay  off  even  a  point.
By  11-30  the  gale  had  increased  to  a  hurricane.  The  Sympieso- meter  had  fallen  from  29°  30'  to  28°  10'.  The  fore-top-mast  waa blown  over  the  side,  and  was  shortly  followed  by  the  main  and  mizen- top-masts  which  were  snapped  off  close  by  the  cap,  the  former  taking with  it  the  main  yard  broken  in  half  in  the  slings.  In  less  than  ten minutes  we  were  a  wreck  fore  and  aft,  the  fore-top-mast  striking heavily  against  the  top-sides  abreast  of  the  fore-rigging.
Shortly  after  12  noon,  the  squalls  lulled  almost  to  a  calm,  and we  congratulated  ourselves  that  the  force  of  the  gale  was  broken  ;  all hands  went  to  work  to  clear  away  the  wreck,  and  we  bent  a  new spanker  and  got  up  another  foresail  ready  to  bend.  The  loose  spars, etc.,  were  lashed  to  the  ringbolts,  and  the  Major's  horsebox  secured with  extra  lashings.  The  weather  was  still  cloudy,  the  Thermometer being  8-t",  the  Sympiesometer  28°  10',  and  it  was  close  and  sultry  with an  occasional  gleam  of  sunshine.  An  immense  number  of  birds  came on  board  completely  spent  by  their  struggles  with  the  wind,  and  we caught  several,  among  them  being  hawks,  goat-suckers,  golden  king- fishers, etc.
It  being  found  impossible  to  light  a  fire  in  either  of  the  galleys, the  men  were  served  with  some  biscuits  and  a  glass  of  rum  each,  of which  they  stood  much  in  need,  every  article  of  their  clothing  being thoroughly  wet  ;  not  a  murmur  was  heard  and  each  man  stood  ready to  give  his  assistance  as  required,  whether  in  clearing  the  wreck  or at  the  pumps.
By  3  P.M.  the  weather  again  lowered,  the  Sympiesometer  which had  stood  at  28°  10',  fell  to  27°  90',  and  the  squalls  recommenced
130  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
with  great  violence,  accompanied  as  before  with  small  rain,  thunder and  lightning.
By  4  P.M.  the  gale  had  increased  to  a  hurricane,  both  the  quarter boats,  the  cuddy  sky-light,  meat  safe,  and  hen-coops  were  blown  away. The  sea  was  boiling  up  as  high  as  the  poop,  and  the  general  appear- ance of  the  ship  in  this  storm  was  truly  awful.  We  got  a  tarpaulin battened  over  the  cuddy  hatch  to  keep  the  wet  out.
At  5  P.M.  the  ship  rolling  heavily,  the  Major's  horsebox  gave way,  and  the  horse  falling  on  the  deck,  was  thrown  by  the  next lurch  down  the  hatchway  amongst  the  soldiers.  The  poor  animal's fore  legs  were  broken,  and  finding  it  impossible  to  rig  a  purchase  to hoist  him  upon  deck,  his  throat  was  cut  and  the  carcase  lashed  to leeward  as  securely  as  possible.  Night  came  on,  and  though  the Sympiesometer  was  still  falling  and  the  squalls  were  terrific  beyond description,  yet  we  kept  up  our  spirits  in  the  hope  that  the  gale  would have  blown  itself  out  by  the  morning,  when,  with  the  whole  day before  us,  we  might  get  sufficient  sail  on  the  ship  to  keep  her  under command.
Day  broke,  Monday,  the  llth  of  November,  and  brought  disap- pointment to  our  hopes.  The  gale,  which  had  blown  violently  during the  night,  had  in  no  way  abated.  The  ship  continued  to  labour  much, and  rolled  heavily ;  the  tarpaulin  was  blown  off  the  cuddy  hatch  ;  the spars  broke  adrift  and  carried  with  them  the  cooking  coppers  (which were  broken  to  pieces),  the  galleys,  long  boat,  and  the  other  horse- box, and,  as  the  ship  rolled,  they,  together  with  some  thirty  fathom of  chain  cable  belonging  to  the  working  anchor,  which  was  on  deck, were  thrown  from  side  to  side  with  considerable  violence.  To  move along  the  deck  was  impossible,  but  fortunately,  about  11  A.M.  the gale  partially  lulled,  and  fearing  that  the  long  boat  (which  was  stove in)  would  carry  away  the  bulwarks,  it  was  hoisted  over  the  side  and cut  adrift ;  we  next  threw  overboard  the  other  horse,  which  had  been crushed  in  its  box  by  the  long  boat,  all  the  loose  spars,  and  as  much lumber  as  possible  from  about  the  decks.
The  soldiers  assisted  the  crew  and  worked  the  pumps,  where  many
WITH  THE  ANDAMANE3B.
of  them  got  severely  hurt,  being  jammed  by  the  spars,  etc.,  and  ono poor  fellow  had  bis  leg  broken.
At  12  noon,  the  sun  came  oat  for  a  few  minutes,  and  the  Master endeavoured  to  get  an  observation,  but  the  horizon  was  not  visible. About  half  a  mile  to  the  eastward  we  saw  a  barque  with  only  her bowsprit,  and  main  and  mizen  lower  masts  standing,  and  shortly after  a  brig  was  descried,  totally  dismasted  ;  b3th  vessels  appeared  to be  labouring  severely  and  the  sea  was  breaking  over  them.  Another tarpaulin  was  battened  over  the  cuddy  hatch  and  a  door  with  some strong  staves  was  nailed  over  it  to  keep  it  from  being  blown  away again.
2  P.M.  —  The  gale  had  now  continued  with  but  two  short  lulls   for 38  hours.    The  Sympiesometer  was  27°-30',  and    still  falling.      With the  horrors  of  the  past  night  in  our  minds  we  hoped  for  the   best,  yet feared  a  repetition  of  what  we  had  already   endured.      Some  biscuits and  a  glass  of  rum  was  again  issued  to  each    of   the  men,  raw  pork was  offered  to  them  and  declined,  as  they  thought  they  could  manage without  it.
3  P.M.  —  The  rain  recommenced  falling,  with   thunder  and  light- ning, and  heavy  squalls,  and  by  4.  P.M.  the  gale  had  again  increased to  a  hurricane,  the  ship  rolling  heavily.      At  night  the  squalls  wore truly  fearful,  with  much  thunder  and  lightning.
At  10  P.M.  it  lulled  for  a  few  minutes  ;  the  wind  then  veered round  to  the  East-  North-East  and  blew  with  greater  violence  than  ever. The  Sympiesometer  stood  at  27°-5',  the  Thermometer  at  84°,  and  it was  close  and  sultry.  The  ship  being  now  on  the  opposite  tack,  the remaining  spars,  etc.,  which  had  been  secured  to  leeward,  broke adrift  ;  while  between  decks,  the  dead  horse  was  forced  from  his lashings  and  hurled  from  side  to  side,  carrying  away  the  arm  racks, lockers,  etc.,  fore  and  aft,  and  creating  the  greatest  confusion,  the arms,  accoutrements,  and  knapsacks  rolling  about  in  every  direction. Several  of  the  men  were  hurt,  and  another  man  had  his  leg  broken. After  much  exertion,  we  succeeded  in  securing  the  horse  to  the  main- mast, the  ship  at  this  time  taking  a  good  deal  of  water  on  board which  kept  pouring  down  the  hatchways.
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
11-30  P.M.  —The  squalls  were  awful  with  thunder  and  lightning  ; part  of  the  "bulwarks  were  blown  away,  and  the  poop  began  to  crack and  the  fore  part  to  give  way  ;  the  cuddy  table  and  seats  were wrenched  from  their  fastenings  in  the  decks  and  thrown  to  leeward. Few  of  us  ever  expected  to  see  the  morning.  The  ship  trembled  from stem  to  stern,  her  bell  tolling  mournfully  with  every  gust,  as  if  to warn  us  of  our  approaching  destruction.  In  and  around  the  hospital the  married  soldiers  had  assembled  with  their  wives  and  families. One  of  the  women  read  portions  from  the  Bible  aloud,  after  which they  joined  in  prayer  and  sung  a  hymn.
Every  moment  the  ship  threatened  to  break  up.  The  starboard topsides  and  covering  boards  were  started  and  the  water  poured  in  in great  quantities,  the  men  endeavouring  to  stop  the  leaks  with  their blankets,  loose  coats,  and  whatever  else  they  could  find.  "With  each squall  the  poop  seemed  to  give  more  and  more.  The  Master  took  his chronometer,  sextant,  and  charts  down  the  after  hatch  into  the  lower cabin,  telling  the  officers  in  the  cuddy  to  be  prepared  to  go  below,  as he  feared  the  poop  was  no  longer  safe.
Midnight.  —  The  hurricane  still  raged  furiously,  the  ship  making much  water  and  labouring  heavily  ;  squall  succeeded  squall  almost without  intermission,  with  thunder  and  lightning  ;  the  Sympiesometer was  below  27°,  the  oil  occasionally  leaving  the  tube  altogether.  The Thermometer  stood  at  84°,  and  it  was  excessively  close.
About  12-80  the  ship  struck,  and  the  sea  breaking  over  her  at  the same  moment  threw  her  on  her  beam  ends  ;  the  larboard  poop  after- cabin  was  swamped  and  raised  from  the  deck,  the  Master's  cabin  was also  floated.  The  cuddy  door  was  jammed  so  that  it  could  not  be opened,  and  one  of  the  windows,  and  the  steward's  pantry,  were  stove in.  Both  the  mates  were  washed  out  of  their  cabins,  one  scrambled into  the  cuddy  through  the  broken  window,  while  the  other  got  down the  steerage  hatch.  The  spanker  boom  was  broken  in  three  pieces, one  of  which  striking  the  man  at  the  lee  helm  carried  away  several  of the  spokes  and  jammed  the  wheel.  These  were  moments  of  awful suspense,  the  ship  on  her  beam  ends,  and  we  clinging  to  whatever  we
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
could  for  support,  expecting  every  moment  that  the  next  would   dash her  to  atoms  and  seal  our  fate.
The  boatswain  cried  out  for  all  hands  to  scramble  up  to  windward, in  order  that  perhaps  she  might  right.  Shortly  after  she  appeared  to be  forced  over  into  smooth  water,  when  she  righted.  At  this  time  the leak  between  decks  had  so  much  increased  that  one  of  the  soldiers came  to  report  that  they  feared  the  ship  was  breaking  up  ;  the  water poured  in  so  fast  that  it  defied  all  their  exertions  to  stop  it.  The Master,  with  some  of  the  officers  went  below,  and  the  men,  under their  directions,  collected  blankets,  loose  coats,  etc.,  and  forced  them in  between  the  covering  boards  whence  the  water  was  rushing  in. The  lower  deck  was  flooded,  the  water  washing  from  side  to  side.  The Master  returned  to  the  cuddy  and  informed  the  Commanding  Officer it  was  necessary  that  the  pumps  should  be  manned  ;  one  of  tbe  officers scrambled  out  on  deck  through  the  window,  but  was  almost  immedi- atfly  obliged  to  return.  The  night  was  extremely  dark  and  the  decks so  lumbered  up  it  was  quite  impossible  to  find  the  pumps,  but  the attempt  was  made  from  between  decks  with  better  success,  the  party ascending  the  hatchway  and  contriving  to  reach  them.  After working  for  some  time  it  was  ascertained  that  the  ship  was  ashore. The  wind  continued  raging,  and  the  sprays  to  break  over  her.
The  night  was  so  dark  it  was  impossible  to  see  a  yard  before  us, except  during  the  flashes  of  lightning,  when  trees  could  be  clearly discerned  close  on  board  the  larboard  side.  By  1  A.M.  the  ship  was perfectly  steady,  the  wind  still  blowirg  violently  with  much  rain, thunder,  and  lightning.  The  Sympiesometer  had  risen  to  27°  20',  and continued  to  rise  rapidly  ;  by  2  A.M.,  it  was  up  to  27°  60'.
To  describe  this  awful  hurricane  which  had  lasted  some  fifty hours,  so  as  to  give  the  reader  anything  like  an  adequate  idea  of  its fearful  violence,  or  the  anxiety  of  our  situation,  would  be  impossible.
The  ship  was  an  utter  wreck,  crowded  with  upwards  of  400  souls, and  without  a  single  boat  on  board.  Such  was  our  situation  when  it pleased  God  to  come  to  our  assistance.
From  the  commencement  of  the  gale  part  of  a  cold  fowl  and  some biscuits  were  all  the  officers  had  amongst  them,  so,  after  congratu-
134
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  KELAT1OSS
lating  each  other  on  our  miraculous  escape,  and  inwardly  returning thanks  to  Heaven,  we  took  some  ale,  and  wine  and  water,  before  lying- down,  and  so  completely  was  nature  exhausted  that  in  less  than  half an  hour  every  soul  on  board  was  fast  asleep.
The  next  morning  at  daylight,  to  our  great  astonishment  we discovered  we  had  been  driven  high  on  shore  into  the  centre  of  a mangrove  swamp,  where  the  ship  had  made  a  way  for  herself,  and  as we  looked  around  and  saw  our  position, — a  770-ton  ship  in  the  centre of  a  wood,  we  could  scarcely  believe  our  senses.
On  the  shore,  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  outside  of  us,  lay  the barque  we  had  seen  the  previous  day.  At  low  tide  a  party  of  soldiers were  lowered  from  her  poop  and  waded  over  to  us  ;  from  the  officer who  accompanied  them  we  ascertained  our  companion  to  be  the barque  Runnymede,  Captain  Doughty,  from  Gravesend  to  Calcutta with  detachments  of  the  10th  and  50th  Regiments  under  the  com- mand of  Captain  Stapleton,  60th  Regiment.
This  day,  Tuesday,  the  12th  of  November,  it  rained  incessantly.  A topsail  was  spread  over  the  quarter  deck  for  an  awning,  and  the broken  pieces  of  the  coppers  were  collected  to  make  a  stove.  After some  contriving  we  succeeded  in  getting  a  kettle  of  water  boiled  for breakfast,  and  part  of  a  broken  boiler  propped  up  to  cook  the  meat for  the  men.  About  noon  their  dinner,  of  which  they  stood  much  in need,  was  served  out ;  they  had  tasted  nothing  with  the  exception  of a  little  biscuit,  for  72  hours.  Our  live  stock  was  mustered  and  found to  consist  of  a  solitary  pig,  everything  else  had  either  died  during  the gale,  or  been  washed  overboard.  The  debris  from  below  was  brought up  and  thrown  over  the  side,  and  the  between-decks  were  swabbed dry  and  clean.  The  Second  Officer  reported  that  all  the  stores  in  the hold  had  been  turned  out  of  their  places,  a  great  portion  of  the  bread, flour,  sugar,  etc,,  was  found  to  be  damaged,  and  many  of  the  pork  and beef  casks  stove  in  ;  sad  news  for  us  in  our  situation  !
In  the  evening  Captains  Stapleton  and  Doughty,  with  the  troops and  crew,  left  the  Rnnnymtde,  and  came  on  board  the  Briton, it  being  feared  that  the  former  vessel  might  go  to  pieces  durirg  the night  in  the  surf,  as  the  gale  was  still  blowing,  there  was  a  heavy
WITH  THE  ANDAMAN ESE.  135
sea  on,   and   she   was  farther  out  on  the  edge  of  the  reef  than  the Brit  OH.
Having  now  been  joined  by  our  comrades  of  the  Runnymede, I  am  enabled,  through  the  kindness  of  her  Commander,  to  introduce here  a  short  account  of  the  dangers  she  had  encountered.
The  Barque  Runnymede,  under  the  command  of  Captain Doughty,  sailed  from  Gravesend  on  the  20th  June,  1844,  bound  to Calcutta,  with  the  following  detachments  under  the  command  of Captain  Stapleton,  50th  Regiment  : —
10th  Regiment.— -37  privates,  2  women,  and  1  child.
50th   Regiment, — Ensigns   Venables,   Du     Vimal    (  ?  ),     and
Purcell  ;  105  privates,  11  women,  and  13  children. Total. — 4  Officers,  142  privates,  13  women,  and  14  children.
Dr.  Bell,  the  surgeon  of  the  vessel,  was  in  medical  charge.
Their  voyage  had  been  throughout  more  than  usually  unfortunate, as  they  had  met  with  nothing  but  light  or  contrary  winds.  The passage  had  been  delayed  so  much  beyond  the  average  that  many  of the  stores  were  expended,  and  the  water  and  other  stores  running short  it  had  been  deemed  advisable  to  bear  up  for  Penang,  at  wliich port  the  ship  came  to  anchor  on  the  29th  of  October.  Having  filled up  her  water  casks  and  taken  in  the  necessary  supplies,  she  stood  to sea  again  on  the  3rd  of  November,  the  weather  being  fine  and moderate,  and  continuing  so  until  Friday,  the  8th,  when  it  assumed an  unsettled  appearance  with  heavy  squalls.
On  Saturday,  the  9th  of  November,  the  wind  was  variable  and squally  ;  the  fore-topmast-staysail  split  and  they  bent  another  ;  at 2-30  P.M.  on  the  same  day  they  reefed  the  mainsail ;  the  second fore-topmast-staysail  split  during  the  night,  owing  to  the  heavy squalls.
On  Sunday,  the  10th  of  November,  the  Barometer  was  falling,  and they  experienced  a  strong  gale  and  heavy  squalls.  At  5  A.M.  they took  in  the  main  and  fore  sails,  and  close  reefed  the  topsails.  The gear  of  the  former  sails  gave  way.
Afc  6  A.M.,  the  wind  was  South-West,  and  blowing  very  heavily,  so
136  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
they  took  in  the  fore-topsail  and  brought  the  ship  to  the  wind  under the  close  reefed  main-topsail,  and  main-trysail.
At  noon  the  sun  was  obscured ;  the  Latitude,  by  dead  reckonin- was  11  -6  ,  N.,  Longitude  96°'0'  E.,  wind,  South-West,  Barometer  29°" ana  railing.
At  1  P.M.,  the  fore  and  main-topsails  were  taken  in,  and  the  shin was  under  the  main-trysail  only.
At  2-30  P.M.,  the  fore  and  main-topgallant  masts  were  blown away;  the  wind  was  South,  and  blowing  heavily.  The  main-trysail was  torn  to  atoms  and  the  ship  was  under  bare  poles,  laying  beauti- ful y  to  the  wind  with  the  helm  amidships;  the  hurricane  was increasing,  with  much  rain.
At  4  P  M.,  the  wind  came  from  the  South-East  with  terrific  force, Fhe  hatches  were  all  battened  down.    The  starboard  quarter  boat  wa washed  away.
At  6-cO  P.M.,  it  fell  nearly  calm,  the  wind   backing  round  to  the South-West  and  the  sea  going  down.     The  Barometer  was   28°  £ '  kept  the  ship  away  North  by  East  and  got  the  topsails  re-secured' parts  of  them  having  blown  adrift.
At  SPM.,  hoilow  gusts  of  wind  came  and  they  brought  the  ship to  the  wind  on  the  larboard  tack.
t*  s"S'  ^  ^rric&ne  was  blowin&  ^  heavily  as  before.
50,  the  larboard  quarter  boat  was  torn  from  the  davits  and loWn  across  the  poop  carrying  away  the  binnacle  and  hencoops.
P.M.,  the  gale  was,  if  possible,  increasing.  The  foremast broke  m  three  piece,  carrying  away  with  it  the  jlboom,  starZS cathead,  mam  and  mizen  topmasts,  and  the  main  yard,  iLv  n^  the mam  and  mizen  lower  masts  alone  standing.
,tt!l^'r',feWindrdrainWereSOSaeVerethat   the  men  °°uld
air   <   T  f °thTOP'  ^  ^  theref°re  ^P10^  in  baling   the
hatch        TI  6   'tWeen-decks«   havi*S   been   forced  dowf  the
seaboat     Th
WITH  THE  ANDAMANE3E.  137
Monday,  llth. — The  hurricane  continued  with  equal  severity,  the wind  being  South-East.  Barometer  28°  0'.  The  gusts  were  so  terrific mixed  with  the  drift  and  rain,  that  no  one  could  stand  on  deck  to  man the  pumps  or  clear  the  wreck.  The  starboard  bower  anchor  was hanging  only  by  the  shank  painter,  and  as  the  iron  work  was  knock- ing into  the  ship's  side  the  chain  was  unshackled  and  the  anchor  cast adrift.
Noon. — Latitude  by  dead  reckoning  II0  6'  N.,  Longitude 95°  20'  E.  No  observations  had  been  taken  since  the  7th,  The Barometer  began  to  rise  a  little.  The  hurricane  still  raged  in  gusts  and the  ship  was  perfectly  unmanageable  from  her  crippled  state,  but  rode like  a  bird  over  a  confused  sea  running  from  every  point  of  the  com- pass. A  large  barque  with  topmasts  and  main  yard  gone  drifted  past them,  and  a  brig  totally  dismasted  was  seen  to  leeward.
At  4  P.M.,  the  Barometer  had  fallen  to  27°  70',  and  the  mineral Sympiesometor  left  the  index  tube.  The  hurricane  blew  with  terrfio force.  The  front  of  the  poop  to  leeward,  the  cabin  door,  and skylights,  were  blown  away,  and  they  expected  every  moment  that the  poop  would  be  torn  off.  The  severity  of  the  wind  was  beyond description,  there  was  nothing  to  which  it  could  be  compared,  for unless  present,  no  one  could  conceive  the  destructive  power  and  force of  wind,  crushing  everything  before  it  as  if  it  were  a  metallic  body.
At  8  P.M.,  there  was  no  abatement  in  its  force.  Every  one, soldier  and  sailor,  did  all  in  his  power  to  keep  the  ship  free  of  water. It  was  impossible  to  stand  at  the  pumps,  and  the  water  being  princi- pally in  the  'tween-decks,  it  was  bailed  out  by  the  soldiers,  as  far as  possible.
At  midnight  the  hurricane  raged  with  equal  severity.  The  gusts were  awful,  and  the  rudder  carried  away.
At  1-30  A.M.,  on  the  12th,  they  felt  the  ship  strike,  and  considered the  destruction  of  the  vessel  and  the  loss  of  their  lives  certain.  But it  pleased  Almighty  God  to  decree  otherwise,  for  although  the  ship filled  up  to  her  lower  beams  with  water,  she  was  thrown  so  high  on a  reef  that  all  the  force  of  the  water  was  broken  and  smoothened, and  the  bilge  pieces  keeping  her  upright,  she  lay  comparatively
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
quiet.  Not  knowing  their  position,  the  ship  being  hilged,  and  fearful of  her  beating  over  the  reef  into  deep  water  again,  they  let  go  the larboard  bower  anchor,  and  the  water  shortly  after  leaving  her,  all hands  fell  asleep.
At  daybreak  the  force  of  the  hurricane  had  lessened,  though  there was  much  rain.  The  Barometer  rose  slowly  until  it  stood  at  29°  45' They  saw  the  line  of  the  shore  to  leeward,  the  ship  being  nearly  dry aft.
With  the  increasing  light  they  saw,  inside  of  them,  up  amongst the  trees,  a  large  barque  with  troops  onboard.  A  n  officer  and  twelve men  were  sent  over  the  stern  to  communicate  with  her.
At  7  A.M.,  the  tide  not  serving,  orders  were  given  for  the  men  to land  at  the  next  low  water,  and,  if  possible,  to  get  something  cooked, for,  as  no  fire  could  be  kept  alight  during  the  hurricane,  the  sailors and  troops  had  had  merely  a  biscuit  and  a  glass  of  rum  each  since its  commencement.
At  3-30  P.M.,  the  tide  having  fallen  sufficiently  for  the  men  to wade  on  shore,  the  officer  returned  on  board  and  reported  the vessel  inside  the  reef  to  be  the  Briton,  from  Sydney,  with  soldiers of  the  80th  Regiment  under  the  command  of  Major  Bunbury  bound for  Calcutta,  and  short  of  everything.
All  hands,  soldiers,  women,  children,  and  crew  had  left  the  wreck by  the  evening.  The  Barometer  was  falling  slightly,  and  the  weather looked  very  threatening,  so,  by  great  kindness  on  the  part  of  the people  there,  the  men  from  the  Hunnymede  were  accommodated  on board  the  Briton,  and  though  they  were  in  great  misery  themselves the  newcomers  were  received  with  every  kindness  and  hospitality. They  were  much  pleased  to  hear  of  there  being  a  fair  stock  of  provi- sions on  the  Rtmnymede,  (particularly  of  biscuits  and  flour) which,  if  the  weather  continued  moderate,  were  to  be  landed  for  the benefit  of  both  ships,  Major  Bunbury  taking  the  command  of  all.
I  will  now  continue  my  account;  of  our  joint  doings  on  the  Island.
Wednesday,  13th  November.  1841.  —  Fresh  breezes  with  occasional showers.  Captain  Doughty,  with  the  crew  of  bcth  ships,  returned  to
V7ITH  THE  ANDAMANESB.
139
the  Rnnnymede  to  endeavour  to  save  as  many  stores  as  possible. Another  sail  was  spread  across  the  fore  part  of  the  Briton  for  au awning,  as  the  ship  was  very  much  crowded  with  the  addition  of  the 187  men  from  the  Runnymede.  Two  warps  from  the  fore  and main  mast  heads  were  made  fast  on  shore,  and  the  fore  yard  was  got over  the  starboard  side  to  shore  the  vessel  up,  and  to  prevent  her falling  over.  By  an  observation  this  day,  we  found  the  Latitude  to be  12°  T  N.,  and  the  Longitude  93°  14',  E.,  which  proved  us  to be  on  one  of  the  Islands  of  the  Andaman  Archipelago  (  ?  ).  The  wet clothing  and  blankets  were  brought  up  to  dry,  and  lines  were  rigged fore  and  aft  to  hang  them  on.  A  fatigue  party  commenced  making a  causeway  through  the  mangrove  swamp  to  the  shore.  The  Com- manding Officer  issued  a  Detachment  Order,  placing  the  crews  of  the wrecked  ships  on  the  same  footing  with  the  troops,  and  subjecting them  to  Military  law.
Thursday,  14th. — Moderate  wind,  with  fine  weather.  All  hands busily  engaged  in  drying  their  clothing  and  getting  up  the  damaged provisions  from  the  hold.  We  found  that  most  of  the  cabin  stores were  destroyed,  and  our  crockery  and  glass  broken.  Three  carpenters went  on  board  the  Runnymede  to  put  her  long  boat,  (the  only boat  remaining  sound  in  the  two  ships),  in  a  proper  state  to  proceed to  the  nearest  port  to  report  our  situation.  The  carpenter's  mate  was employed  in  cutting  a  large  hole  through  the  larboard  side  of  the main  deck  to  admit  air,  and  act  as  a  means  of  communication  with the  shore.
The  bodies  of  two  natives  found  on  the  beach  were  buried  by  our people,  and  above  them  in  the  bush  lay  parts  of  the  wreck  of  a country  boat.  Several  of  us,  both  officers  and  men,  are  laid  up  with swollen  feet,  the  result,  no  doubt,  of  the  constant  exposure  to  wet- This  afternoon  the  causeway  through  the  swamp  to  the  shore  was made  passable,  and  some  excellent  prawns  were  brought  in,  a  most comfortable  treat.
Friday,  15th. — Fatigue  parties  were  employed  in  putting  the hold  to  rights,  drying  the  provisions,  and  cleaning  down  the  decks,
while  others  were  sent  on  shore  in  search  of  water.
i)
140  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
The  destruction  caused  by  this  fearful  hurricane  appears  to  have extended  all  over  the  island ;  not  a  leaf  was  to  be  seen  on  the  trees, nor  was  a  tree  unbroken ;  they  lay  about  in  all  directions,  some crushed  down,  others  torn  up  by  the  roots,  many  of  them  of  the largest  size,  and  probably  100  years  old.  The  bush  was  rendered almost  impassable  by  canes  and  bamboos  lying  many  feet  deep,  and it  was  only  by  walking  along  the  fallen  timber  that  one  could  get through  at  all.
The  Detachments  of  the  10th  and  50th  Regiments  were  sent  on shore  this  day,  and  formed  an  encampment  for  themselves  on  a  rising ground  facing  the  beach,  it  being  feared  that  from  the  over-crowded state  of  the  ship,  some  disease  might  break  out.
At  low  tide  a  fatigue  party  was  employed  in  conveying  stores  from the  Runnymede  to  the  Briton,  and  in  the  afternoon  the  cooks were  sent  on  shore  to  erect  the  coppers  saved  from  the  Bunny  mede, as  we  feared  they  might  set  the  deck  on  fire  if  used  on  board,  on account  of  our  having  no  proper  means  of  fixing  them  there.  Some pigeons  were  shot,  much  resembling  in  appearance  the  English  brood bird.
Saturday,  16th. — All  the  married  soldiers  from  the  Briton  were sent  on  shore  to  rig  tents  for  themselves  and  their  families,  and  air ports  were  cut  in  the  'tween-decks  to  give  as  much  ventilation  as possible.  Fatigue  parties  were  employed  in  bringing  stores  from  the Runnymede,  clearing  away  the  bush  around  the  shore,  and  search- ing for  fresh  water.  Some  of  the  officers  went  on  an  exploring  party along  the  beach  to  the  northward,  and  found  fresh  water  and  an oyster  bed,  and  shot  some  more  pigeons.  Two  of  the  sailors  com- menced making  a  canoe  out  of  a  log.
Sunday,  17th. — Divine  Service  was  held  on  board  the Briton,  and  we  all  returned  thanks  to  Almighty  God,  and  read  the forms  of  prayer  for  the  preservation  of  our  lives.
Some  natives  made  their  appearance  on  the  shore  to  the  southward, and  a  few  of  them  tried  to  surround  two  sailors  who  were  collecting shell-fish,  but  "  Jack "  was  not  to  be  done.  An  officer  went  after the  savages  with  a  small  party,  but  as  soon  as  they  saw  him  coming
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  -i  ,-,
they  put  off  in  their  canoe.    We  found  their  fire,  and  close  to   it  a piece  of  drift  wood  and  some  fish  bones.
Fatigue  parties  were  employed  in  digging  holes  and   cutting   a communication  between  the  ship  and  Ihe  shore.
The  Commanding  Officer  issued  a  Detachment  Order  complimenting both  troops  and  crew  on  their  cool  and  manly  conduct  during  the gale,  and  noting  his  high  approval  of  their  exertions.
At  night  some  natives  attempted  to  approach  the  Runny mede. A  few  shots  were  fired  in  their  direction,  when  they  took  their  canoe and  themselves  off  at  the  same  time.
Monday,  18th.— This  morning  a  Detachment  Order  was  issued, in  which  it  was  regretted  that  the  natives  should  have  been  fired  at  on the  previous  night  from  the  Rumtymede,  and  directing  that  every attempt  should  be  made  to  conciliate  them,  in  order  to  induce  them to  bring  in  provisions,  etc.,  and  forbidding  the  men  to  go  too  far  from the  camp.
A  Defachment  Court-Martial  assembled  on  board  the  Briton for  the  trial  of  some  men  charged  with  insubordination,  and  pilfering from  the  cargo  of  the  Runnymede,  a  large  portion  of  which consisted  of  bottled  beer,  etc.
The  Doctors  having  reported  "  that  the  position  of  the  Brilon  in a  mangrove  swamp  would  prove  injurious  to  the  health  of  the  troops if  tbey  continued  to  occupy  it  as  a  barrack  or  hospital,  "  two  Com- panies of  the  80th  Regiment  were  ordered  on  shore  to  clear  a  place and  form  an  encampment ;  and  the  sick,  under  the  charge  of  one  of the  Surgeons,  were  transferred  to  the  Runnymede,  which,  having now  become  finally  embedded  in  the  sand,  was  converted  into  a hospital.
Fatigue  and  working  parties  were  employed  in  conveying  stores from  the  Runnymede,  carrying  water  from  the  hills,  and  clearing the  bush  around  the  camp.
Tuesday,  19th. — Fatigue  and  working  parties  were  employed as  usual.  In  the  afternoon  we  had  our  first  parade.  Our  appear- ance, as  may  well  be  supposed,  was  rather  ludicrous,  the  greater  portion of  the  men's  necessaries  and  clothing  having  been  either  lost  or
142  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
destroyed  during  the  gale.  Four  courts-martial  were  held,  and  as many  men  punished,  for  insubordination,  etc.,  au  unpleasant  but necessary  duty.
Wednesday,  20th. — Fatigue  parties  were  employed  in  collect- ing and  drying  the  stores,  erecting  tents,  and  clearing  away  the jungle  around  the  encampment.  Our  Pioneers'  tools  were  found exceedingly  useful,  and  we  could  never  have  managed  without  them. The  rest  of  the  troops  left  the  Briton,  and  joined  the  camp,  the guard  over  the  stores  alone  remaining  on  board.  The  miasma  arising from  the  swamp  at  low  tide,  being  found  disagreeable  and  unhealthy most  of  the  officers  commenced  erecting  tents  for  themselves  on  shore- Thursday,  21st. — Fatigue  and  working  parties  were  employed  as usual,  and  all  the  stores  were  collected  together  on  board  the Briton,  preparatory  to  their  being  examined  by  a  Board  of Survey.
Some  of  our  men,  while  searching  for  shell- fish  this  afternoon  on the  beach,  opposite  the  camp,  were  attacked  by  several  natives,  and four  of  them  were  wounded  by  their  arrows,  one  rather  seriously . the  alarm  was  sounded,  the  men  stood  to  their  arms,  and  a  party  was despatched  in  pursuit  of  the  savages,  but  without  success,  the  black rascals  escaping  into  the  jungle,  luckily  for  them,  or  they  would certainly  have  got  a  Roland  for  their  Oliver.
A  guard  was  mounted  in  the  evening  on  the  beach  below  the camp  to  keep  them  at  a  respectful  distance.  The  natives  were  perfectly naked,  regular  savages  in  both  appearance  and  habits,  and  no  doubt cannibals  ;  there  is  little  prospect  of  our  receiving  any  assistance  from them.  With  the  exception  of  wild  pigs,  several  of  which  had  been seen,  the  island  appears  to  be  quite  unproductive,  neither  fruit  nor vegetables  of  any  description  having  been  as  yet  discovered.
Friday,  22nd.^A  Board  of  Survey  assembled  on  board  the Briton  to  examine  into  the  state  of  the  stores  saved  from  the wrecks,  and  to  report  on  the  most  suitable  scale  of  issue,  calculating for  40  days  from  date.  After  taking  an  inventory  of  the  provisions) etc.,  and  ascertaining  that  378  full  rations,  allowing  one-half  for  the children,  would  be  required  daily,  the  Court  recommended  the
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  14  g
following  scale  for  alternate  days,  which  was  approved  of  by  the  Com- manding Officer  ; —
1st  day — |  Ib.  bread,  £  Ib.  beef,  £  gill  of  spirits,  ^  oz.  toa,  and
^  oz.  sugar.
2nd  day— ^  Ib.  flour,    £  Ib.  pork,  J  pint  peas,   £  oz.  coffee* £  oz,  sugar,  ^  gill  of  spirits.
Even  this  reduced  scale  would  only  last  for  36  days,  till  the  27th of  December.  On  our  first  arrival  on  the  island  we  had  occasional dishes  of  prawns,  crabs,  and  other  shell-fish,  but  they  soon  disappeared from  the  number  constantly  searching  for  them.  For  two  miles around  the  camp  the  coast  was  completely  cleared  of  every  descrip- tion of  shell-fish,  and  to  go  further,  or  even  so  far,  without  arms,  was not  safe  on  account  of  the  natives.
A  private  of  the  80th  Regiment  died  in  hospital  of  dysentery,  a disease  rather  prevalent,  and  most  probably  caused  by  the  water  which has  a  disagreeable  vegetable  flavour.
Saturday,  23rd. — The  Runnymede  long  boat  was  nearly  ready for  sea,  and  the  men  were  employed  in  collecting  stores  for  her,  and making  preparations  for  sending  her  away.
Natives  were  seen  on  the  opposite  island  with  two  large  canoes.
Sunday,  24th. — Divine  Service  was  held  on  board  the  Briton.
Natives  came  close  to  the  ship  collecting  pieces  of  wreck,  nails, and  iron  hoops  ;  two  of  the  men  were  seat  towards  them  with  an  old jacket,  as  a  present,  to  see  if  it  would  be  possible  to  conciliate "  Blackey.  "  They  placed  it  on  a  broken  stump  and  retired  a  short distance,  making  signs  to  the  natives  to  take  it ;  the  black  rascals immediately  took  the  jacket  down,  trampled  on  it,  and  commenced  an attack  on  our  men  in  return  for  their  kindness,  but  seeing  some  of their  comrades  who  had  been  sent  to  watch  their  motions  coming  up with  their  arms,  they  made  off  and  took  to  the  bush,  leaving  part  of a  bow  and  a  bundle  of  arrows  behind  them.  They  seem  perfectly  to understand  the  meaning  of  fire-arms,  making  off  the  moment  they see  a  person  with  them,  while  they  are  equally  ready  to  attack  those who  chance  to  be  unarmed.
The  coast  is  strewed    in  every  direction  with  wreckage,  and  we
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  GELATIONS
found  this  evening  part  of  a  chest-of-drawers,  and  the  top  of  a washing  stand,  belonging  to  some  strange  ship.  I  fear  many  others must  have  suffered  besides  ourselves.
The  long  boat  is   finished,    and    is   to  be   launched  on   to-morrow's flood  tide.
Monday,  25th.  —  The  long  boat  was  launched  from  the  deck  of  the Hunnymede  at  12  o'clock  this  day.  A  gang  was  employed  carry- ing stores  and  water  off  to  her.
At  5  P  M.,  Captain  Hall,  and  Lieutenant  Leslie  of  the  80th  Regi- ment, (the  bearer  of  the  despatches),  the  boatswain,  and  five  sailors, embarked  on  board  of  her,  and  within  an  hour  afterwards  The Hope  (an  appropriate  name  for  her)  got  underweigh  amidst  the cheers  of  hundreds,  and  took  her  departure  from  the  island  accom- panied with  the  best  wishes  and  fervent  prayers  of  all  for  her  safety and  success.
Tuesday,  26th.  —  The  Mope  was  not  in  sight  at  daylight.
Three  of  the  officers,  while  strolling  on  the  shore  after  dinner, sighted  a  wild  hog  ;  they  contrived  to  get  between  him  and  the  bush unperceived,  but  the  moment  he  winded  them  away  he  went,  a charge  of  shot  and  ball  flying  after  him  as  he  passed  each  in  succes- sion; one  of  the  bullets  lodged  in  his  head,  which  bothered  him  a  good deal,  and  sent  him  staggering  amongst  the  logs.  A  small  King Charles  spaniel,  the  favourite  of  the  Regiment,  who  happened unfortunately  to  be  of  the  party,  rushed  amongst  the  logs  and  seized the  hog  by  the  ear,  while  one  of  the  men  ran  up  with  a  large  stick to  despatch  him,  and  not  observing  the  little  dog  in  the  dusk  he accidentally  struck  poor  little  Billy  on  the  head  and  killed  him  on the  spot  ;  the  regret  at  poor  Billy's  fate  was  universal  throughout  the camp,  and  small  as  our  rations  were,  we  would  sooner  have  lost  a day's  supply,  than  our  favourite  dog.  The  hog  when  brought  home weighed  about  80  lb.,  and  had  large  tusks.  The  meat  proved  nearly as  hard  and  tough  as  his  hide,  which  was  half  an  inch  thick  ;  however, tough  as  he  was,  we  were  right  glad  of  such  a  valuable  addition  to our  scanty  rations.
Some  natives  were  encamped  close  to  the  spot  where  the   hog  was
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESR.
killed,  and  the  moment  the  shots  were  fired  they  left  their   tire  set  up a  yell,  and  fled  into  the  bush.
Wednesday,  27th.—  The  carpenters  came  on  shore  from    the          . nymede  and   commenced  erecting  a  tent  and  workshed,  and  makin^ the  necessary  preparations  for  laying  down  the  keel  of  another   boat° >  orkmg  parties  were  employed  in  clearing  around   the  encampments and  making  a  road  to  the  ship.
Thursday,  28th.-Fatigue  and  working  parties  were  employed  in clearing  out  and  deepening  the  wells,  which  are  beginning  to  fail
Several  of  the  officers  left  the  ship,  their  tents  on  shore  being  com- pletod,  and  the  miasma  arising  from  the  mangrove  swamp  bein"  very disagreeable  at  low  water.
Beautiful  shells  of  various  kinds  are  to  be  found  on  the  beach and  we  were  a  good  deal  amused  at  first  to  observe  some  of  a  similar description  to  those  we  had  been  accustomed  to  see  quietly  ornament- ing  chimney-pieces  at  home  running  about  here  in  every  direction.
Friday,  29th.—  Working  parties  were  employed  as  on  the  previous day.  Tne  carpenters'  tent  and  workshed  was  completed.  In  the afternoon  the  keel  of  the  new  boat  was  cut  in  the  jungle.
Saturday,  30th.—  General  parade  for  muster.  A°  fatigue  party brought  in  the  keel  of  the  new  boat  from  the  bush.  One  carpenter, one  master,  four  sawyers,  and  a  blacksmith  from  the  detachment  of the  80th  Regiment  were  ordered  to  assist  in  building  the  new  boat.
Sunday,  1st  December,  1841—  Divine  Service  was  held  on board  the  Sritoa  as  usual.  The  carpenters  were  employed  in making  moulds,  and  constructing  bellows  for  the  forge  ;  the  frame being  made  of  1  inch  plank,  with  the  Pioneers'  aprons  for  sides,  and part  of  a  gun  barrel  for  the  nozzle.  The  sawyers  were  sinking  their pit.  The  blacksmiths  were  making  a  forge.
Large  fires  were  seen  on  the  North  Island,  and  the  natives  seemed very  numerous.
Monday,  2nd.—  Working  parties  were  employed  in  clearing  and deepening  the  wells  and  water  holes.  The  bellows  were  finished. The  sawyers  were  collecting  spars  and  bringing  them  in  to  their  pit. The  blacksmiths  got  the  tiller  of  the  Briton*  »  rudder  for  an  anvil,
146  A  HISTOEY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
and  the  copper  bolts  out  of  her  stern  ports  to  make  nails  with,  not having  a  dozen  left.
The  sailors'  canoe,  which  was  nearly  finished,  took  fire  in  the  night and  both  her  gunwales  were  burnt  down.
Tuesday,  3rd. — Regular  morning  parade  was  held  at  7  A.M.,  thus commencing  the  day ;  the  guards  mounting  immediately  afterwards. The  wells  and  water  holes  are  failing  fast.
Two  officers  went  in  search  of  water  and  found  a  running  stream under  the  hills  about  a  mile  from  the  camp,  and  very  difficult  of access  owing  to  the  denseness  of  the  jungle.  The  bush  was  fired  in several  places  to  clear  the  scrub  off.  Two  native  canoes  were  fishing on  the  opposite  island.  The  keel  of  the  new  boat  was  laid  down, 23  feet  long.  The  sawyers  and  blacksmiths  commenced  work.  The sailors  cleared  off  the  burnt  part  from  their  canoe  and  set  about planking  her  sides,  as  the  only  way  to  repair  the  damage.
The  fires  blazing  at  night  in  front  of  the  various  camps  and picquet  tents  give  the  bay  quite  the  appearance  of  a  village.
Wednesday,  4th.— Heavy  rain  fell  Curing  the  night,  and  filled  the wells  and  water  holes.  All  the  tents  were  leaking,  being  mostly  made from  old  canvas.  The  short  rations  and  heavy  fatigues  began  to  tell on  the  men.  The  shore  is  covered  with  them,  at  each  low  tide,  search- ing for  shell-fish.  A  bag  of  black  pepper,  landed  from  the  Runny- mede,  was  most  acceptable,  the  shell-fish  in  the  men's  weak  state disagreeing  with  many  of  them.
Thursday,  5th. — All  hands  engaged  in  repairing  and  improving their  tents  after  the  rain.  A  General  Order  appeared  directing  one bottle  of  beer  per  diem  to  be  issued  to  each  of  the  carpenters  and other  artificers  employed  in  b  uilding  the  boat.
Friday,  6th. — Several  men  were  admitted  into  hospital  with  fever, and  affections  of  the  head.  A  Detachment  Order  was  issued  "  Pro- hibiting the  men  from  bathing  in  the  heat  of  the  day,  or  otherwise exposing  themselves  in  the  sun.  "
Some  wicker  work  canoes  covered  with  tarred  canvas  were  made by  the  soldiers,  who  paddled  about,  and  fished  in  the  bay  in  them.
Saturday,  7th. — The  sailors  finished  their  canoe    and  launched  it
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  147
in  the  afternoon,  finding  it  answered  better  than  was  expected  after having  heen  so  much  damaged  by  the  fire.
Sunday,  8th. — Divine  Service  was  held  as  usual.  The  canoe brought  in  a  cargo  of  fine  oysters  from  the  bed  to  the  northward. "VVe  observed  a  great  many  pig  tracks  in  the  sand.  A  soldier  of the  80th  died  in  hospital  from  brain  fever.
Monday,  9th. — The  Runnymede's  men  got  a  spar  over  her quarter  and  lashed  it  to  the  mizen  mast  to  shore  her  up.  The  heavy surf  causes  her  to  bump  aft  more  than  is  agreeable.  Quite  a  fleet of  canoes  are  to  be  seen  in  the  bay,  fishing  and  paddling  about.
Tuesday,  10th. — A  large  fish,  of  about  20  Ih.  weight,  resembling  a snapper  in  appearance,  was  caught  by  one  of  the  mosquito  fleet,  and found  to  be  both  coarse  and  hard  when  cooked.
"Wednesday,  llth. — The  encampment  is  quite  gay,  every  tent being  decorated  with  a  numerical  or  distinguishing  flag,  and  the effect  is  very  good,  the  bay,  from  the  Rnnnymedet  forming  a very  pretty  view.
Thursday,  12th. — The  canoe  was  out  fishing  at  the  North  Island, but  without  success.  The  men  saw  two  turtles  on  the  water,  and brought  home  a  few  large  mussels  and  other  shell-fish.
Friday,  13th. — We  repaired  and  pitched  the  canoe,  got  a  large sail  made  for  her,  and  put  on  wash  boards,  a  false  keel,  and  stern post,  \vhich  improved  her  very  much.
Saturday,  14th. — A  party  of  officers  went  to  the  northward  and crossed  over  to  the  other  island  in  the  canoe.  They  saw  a  wild  beast in  the  hush,  of  the  panther  species.  They  found  several  bundles  of pigs'  heads  tied  with  cane  and  laid  together  in  heap?,  and  some stones  suspended  from  the  branches  of  a  tree  by  rattan,  which  they supposed  to  be  some  religious  ceremony  of  the  natives.  A  quantity of  excellent  oysters  were  on  the  rocks  so  they  made  a  fire  and  dined off  them.
Sunday,  15th.— Divine  Service  was  held  as  usual.  The  Hope baa  heen  gone  20  days  to-day.  The  present  rations  are  to  be  reduced from  to-morrow  to  one-half,  which  will  be  all  but  starvation  diet,
c2
148
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
and  little   or   no   shell-fish   are   now  to  he  found  within  miles  of  the
cainp.
At  ahout  11  A.M.  we  had  two  heavy  shocks  of  earthquake.  The Briton  shook  so  violently  that  all  hands  ran  up  from  helow fearing  she  would  fall  over.  The  last  shock  had  scarcely  subsided •when  a  shout  was  heard  from  the  look-out  tree  on  the  right  of  the camp  where  the  men  had  of  their  own  accord  established  a  sentry, relieving  each  other  every  hour.  A  sail !  a  sail  1  was  quickly  echoed from  one  end  of  the  encampment  to  the  other.  The  Runny  meet  e hoisted  her  ensign  and  fired  a  gun,  (a  signal  for  "a  sail  in  the offing,"  already  agreed  upon).  The  camp  was  in  a  regular  commo- tion, shout  following  shout  with  little  intermission,  and  everyone was  on  the  look-out,  asking  "Where  "  ?  "  Where  "  ?  and  straining their  eyes  to  gtt  a  glimpse  of  the  stranger.  Within  a  quarter  of  an hour  she  had  rounded  the  point  and  was  visible  to  all.
At  1  P.M.  she  came  to  an  anchor  abreast  of  the  Runnymede in  15  fathoms,  the  men  cheering  on  shore  while  the  ship  saluted  her with  12  guns.  The  whole  camp  was  like  a  fair,  the  people  hurrying and  firing  in  every  direction.  The  vessel  proved  to  be  a  small schooner  of  70  or  80  tons,  with  our  old  long  boat,  The  Hope, towing  at  her  stern.  Our  canoes  went  off  and  soon  returned  bringing on  shore  Lieutenant  Michael,  an  officer  of  the  17th  Madras  Native Infantry,  the  bearer  of  despatches  from  Mergui  for  the  Commanding Officer.  From  Lieutenant  Michael  we  learnt  the  welcome  news  of the  arrival  of  The  Hope  at  Mergui,  and  the  safety  of  our  comrades. They  had  reached  Mergui  on  the  6th,  12  days  after  their  leaving  this, and  appeared  to  have  suffered  a  good  deal  from  the  sun  and  fatigue, as  the  wind  being  either  light  or  foul  they  were  obliged  to  pull  the greater  part  of  the  distance.  Having  reported  our  situation,  etc., they  were  supplied  with  a  lighter  boat  and  proceeded  on  to  Moulmein on  the  10th,  and  the  day  after  their  departure  the  Officer  Command- ing at  Mergui  despatched  this  vessel,  the  Hon'ble  Company's Schooner,  George  Swinton*  Captain  Daniel  in  command,  to  our
•  Mr.  George  Swinton  was  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  India,  in  the  Saeret  and Political  Department,  in  1824.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  149
relief,  with  provisions  which  were  more  than  acceptable,  and  caused great  rejoicings.  A  half  pound  of  hiscuits  and  a  glass  of  spirits  each, as  an  extra,  was  issued  to  all  hands  to  commemorate  her  arrival. In  the  afternoon  a  soldier  of  the  80th  was  unfortunately  drowned  in the  surf  while  bathing.
Monday,  16th. — Blowing  fresh,  with  a  heavy  surf  on ;  no  commu- nication with  the  schooner ;  full  rations  were  issued  this  day.
Tuesday,  17th. — A  Board  of  Survey  assembled  on  board  the Briton  to  take  an  account  of  the  stores  from  the  George  Swinlon  ; which  were  found  to  consist  chiefly  of  rice,  ghee,  tea,  and sugar,  with  a  small  supply  of  meat,  salt  fish,  and  yams.  The  follow- ing scale  was  submitted  by  the  Board,  and  met  with  the  approval  of the  Commanding  Officer.
Fresh  meat  fib.  or  fib.  of  salt  meat  or  fish  ;  spirits,  1  gill ; bread  or  flour,  |lb.  ;  rice,  ^lb. ;  peas,  J  pint ;  yams,  ^lb.  ;  tea,  %  oz. ; sugar,  1^  oz.
Peas  are  to  be  issued  with  salt  beef  or  pork,  yams  with  fresh  meat or  salt  fish.  A  very  great  improvement  on  our  previous  scale.
The  weather  was  still  blowing  and  unsettled,  and  there  was  too much  surf  on  for  us  to  attempt  to  get  off  to  the  schooner.
Wednesday,  18th. — Weather  more  moderate.  The  Runnymede cut  away  her  mainmast  to  make  her  ride  easier  on  the  surf.  The Hope,  which  had  been  towed  back  to  us  by  the  George  Swinton was  brought  on  shore,  and  her  deck  ripped  off  to  land  the  provisions from  the  Schooner.
A  Brig  was  in  sight  to  the  southward,  and  the  Runnymede hoisted  her  ensign  and  fired  a  gun  in  hopes  of  attracting  her  atten- tion, but  she  passed  without  observing  us.  She  is  supposed  to  have been  a  country  vessel.  One  boat  load  of  provisions  was  landed  from the  Schooner  in  the  afternoon.
Thursday,  19th. — Parties  were  employed  in  landing  provisions from  the  Schooner  and  stowing  them  on  board  the  Briton.  The daily  ration  being  so  much  improved,  the  issue  of  spirits  to  the women  was  stopped  from  this  date.  (!)
Friday,  20th. — The  remainder  of  the  stores  were  landed  from  the
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
Schooner   and   stowed  in  the   Briton.     Melons,   limes,    pumpleuose,
and  other  seeds,  which  had  been  planted  by  the  officers   in   different
parts  of  the  island,  are  coming  up   well,  and   may  prove  a  benefit
hereafter  to  some  other  unfortunates  like  ourselves. A  soldier  of  ihe  50th  died  in  hospital  of  brain  fever. Saturday,  21st.  —  Several  of  the  officers  went  off   to  tbe  Schooner
to  take  a  cruise  in  her  to  the  other  island,  where  she   was   going    for
water.     It  caino  on  to  blow  and  she   could    not   get   underweigh,   so
they  were  obliged  to  fill  casks  for  her  on  shore  from  one  of  our  wells.
The  carpenters  commenced  putting  in  the  ribs   in   the  boat.     Heavy
rain  during  the  night.
Sunday,  22nd.  —  Divine    Service    was  held  as  usual.      Blowing
fresh  with  a  heavy  surf  on.     No  communication  with   the   Schooner.
The  poop  awning   on  board   the    Briton   was  blown   away,  and   the
cuddy  filled  with  water.
Monday,  23rd.  —  Weather  still  wet  and  squally,  and   a  heavy  surf running.     Fatigue  parties  were  employed  filling  water  casks   on   the
beach  for  the  George  Swinton,  repairing  the  causeway  leading through  the  mangrove  swamp  to  the  Briton,  and  clearing  out  the wells.  The  ration  of  the  men  was  reduced  from  f  to  -i  Ib.  per  diem. Tuesday,  24th.  —  The  bottom  of  the  new  boat  was  finished,  except for  the  caulking.  The  Schooner's  jolly  boat  was  swamped  in  the surf  while  taking  off  two  water  casks.  Our  long  boat  went  to  her assistance  and  towed  her  alongside  the  Schooner.  The  blacksmiths are  making  the  rowlocks  for  the  boat,  and  pintles  for  her  rudder. We  hope  to  launch  her  in  a  day  or  two.
Wednesday,  25th.  —  Christmas  Day.  Divine  Service  was  held  on board  the  tfriton.  The  Schooner  took  her  departure  for  Moulmein, Lieutenant  Michael  of  the  17th  Madras  Native  Infantry  bearing despatches  from  the  Commanding  Officer.  The  tents  were  decorated with  green  boughs,  etc.,  in  honour  of  the  day.  No  roast  beef,  but although  our  sugar  was  gone  we  contrived  to  have  a  very  good  plum pudding  without  it.  One  must  not  be  over  particular  in  the  Anda- mans.
The  carpenters  finished  the  caulking  of  the  boat,  and   gave  her
•WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
a  first  coat  of  paint.      A    sailor  of  the  Bunnymede  was  drowned in  the  surf  by  the  upsetting  of  the  dingy.
Our  new  hoat  is  getting  the  flooring  boards,  stern  sheets,  and fittings  in.  Flies  and  mosquitos  are  very  numerous  and  excessively troublesome.  When  we  were  first  cast  away  on  this  island  we  found but  few  flies  and  mosquitos,  they  must  have  been  blown  away  by  the storm  ;  we  are  now  infested  with  myriads.
The  jungle  has  altogether  changed  its  appearance,  the  leaves coming  out  quite  green,  and  many  of  the  numerous  periodical  plants are  a  very  beautiful  sight.  The  snakes  are  also  more  numerous,  several having  been  killed  in  the  camp.  A  small  sucking  pig  was  shot  this afternoon  by  one  of  the  sergeants.  He  saw  the  mother  and  the  rest  of the  family,  but  they  got  away  into  the  jungle.
Friday,  27th.  —  All  our  schemes  to  catch  fish  having  failed,  as  a  last resource  we  got  a  large  wicker-work  pot  to  set  outside  in  deep  water \?ith  a  line  and  weight.  The  weather  is  very  warm.
A  tablet  was  engraved  on  the  rock  near  our  burial  ground  con- taining the  names  of  some  of  the  soldiers  who  died  on  the  island,  etc.
At  night  large  fires  were  lit  round  the  camp  to  burn  off  and  smoke out  the  mosquitos.  A  rocket  was  fired  in  the  offing.
Saturday,  28th.  —  At  daylight  a  Man-of-war  Brig}  and  two small  Schooners  were  in  sight.  The  Brig  stood  on  to  the  southward, the  Schooners,  rounding  the  reef,  came  to  anchor  in  the  bay,  and  the boat  was  sent  off  to  them  and  returned  with  the  news  that  they  be- longed to  the  Hon'ble  Company's  Marine.  The  Schooners,  we  found, were  two  of  the  flotilla  from  Moulmein,  and  the  Brig-of-war,  the Pilot,  Captain  Jervis.
Mr.  "White  gave  us  the  welcome  intelligence  of  the  safe  arrival  of the  rest  of  the  regiment  at  Calcutta,  as  also  that  Transports  from Moulmein  were  on  their  way  to  take  us  off  the  island.
Our  new  boat  was  launched  at  12  o'clock,  and  christened  in  due form  "Andaman."  She  is  27  feet  over  all,  6  feet  6  inches  beam,  and pulls  six  oars.  She  went  through  the  surf  beautifully  and  appears  to be  an  excellent  sea  boat.
The  Pilot,  Brig-of-war,  came  to  anchor  on  the  side  of  the  island
152  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
and  sent  her  cutter  round  to  us  "with  Lieutenant  Leslie,  (who  had  gone away  on  the  Hope  with  the  despatches),  some  fresh  meat,  and  vege- tables.
At  night  we  lighted  a  large  fire  on  the  right  of  the  encampment  as a  heacon  for  the  Transports,  should  they  come  in  sight  during  the  dark- ness.
Sunday,  29th. — One  of  the  Schooners  and  the  Pilot's  cutter  proceed^ ed  to  the  northward  to  join  the  Brig.
About  noon  the  Ayrshire  Transport  arrived  from  Moulmein,  and brought  up  in  the  bay.  Captain  Jervis  and  three  of  his  officers  cam6 round  in  the  gig  and  pinnace,  bringing  all  sorts  of  supplies.  They dined  with  us  and  it  was  quite  a  gay  day,  every  one  being  in  high spirits.  "We  had,  this  evening,  our  first  supper  on  the  island  in  honour of  our  kind  friends  on  the  Pilot.
Monday,  30tb. — A  division  of  the  80th  Regiment  commenced embarking  on  board  the  Ayrshire.  Captain  Jervis,  with  his  gig, returned  to  the  Brig,  leaving  the  pinnace  to  assist  in  the  embarkation.
A  soldier  of  the  60th  Regiment  died  to-day  of  fever.
The  Transport  Elizabeth  Ainslie  from  Moulmein  arrived  this  after, noon,  and  came  to  anchor  near  the  Runnymede.
Flies  and  mosquitos  are  fearfully  troublesome,  there  is  no  sleeping at  night  on  account  of  them.  It  is  quite  time  we  were  away  from  these barbarous  shores.
Tuesday,  31st. — Her  Majesty's  Ship  Pilot  came  round  from  the northward  and  brought  up  in  front  of  the  encampment.  We  com- menced embarking  the  heavy  stores  on  board  the  Elizabeth  Ainslie.
At  4  P.M.,  the  Ayrshire  Transport  sailed  with  the  First  Division  of the  80th  Regiment.
Wednesday,  1st  January,  1815. — New  Year's  Day,  and  our  51st  on the  Island.  The  Second  Division  of  the  80th  Regiment  embarked  on the  Elizabeth  Ainslie.
The  officers  dined  with  their  kind  friends  on  board  Her  Majesty's Ship  Pilot.  Numerous  native  fires  were  seen  on  both  islands,  the black  rascals  eagerly  looking  out  for  our  departure  to  pillage  the  wrecks.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  153
Thursday,  2nd. — At  daylight  the  Transport  Elizabeth  Aiuslie,  with the  remainder  of  the  80th  Regiment,  sailed  for  Calcutta.
Natives  collected  in  great  numbers  on  both  islands.
The  Schooner's  gig,  manned  by  lascars,  while  pulling  along  the reef  was  pursued  by  five  canoes.  The  Pilot's  cutter  went  to  her  assist- ance, when  the  canoes  pulled  back  to  the  reef  and  made  off.
The  60th  Detachment  strengthened  their  camp  guard,  and  placed extra  sentries.
Friday,  3rd. — The  Transport  Agnes  Lee,  arrived  from  Moulmein.
The  sick  soldiers,  women,  and  heavy  luggage,  were  embarked  in the  course  of  the  day.  At  night  the  natives  came  round  the  camp  in great  numbers,  and  fires  were  seen  in  every  direction.  A  picquet  was sent  out  to  drive  them  back,  and  fired  on  a  party  moving  in  rear  of  the tents,  when  they  decamped  and  put  out  their  fires  in  a  most  extraor- dinary manner,  every  trace  but  a  few  chance  embers  disappearing  as  if by  magic.
The  Pilot  despatched  two  boats  to  pull  along  the  shore  in  front of  the  camp,  and  afterwards  sent  two  shots  and  a  shell  flying  amongst a  large  body  of  savages  collected  round  a  fire  a  short  distance  to  the left  of  the  Briton,  Fin  ling  the  place  too  hot  for  him,  "Blackey" showed  his  sense  and  took  himself  off,  nor  did  he  make  his  appearance again  that  night.
Saturday,  4th. — The  remainder  of  the  detachment  of  the  50th Regiment  embarked  in  the  Agnes  Lee.  At  night  the  natives  again assembling  in  and  around  the  camp,  the  marines  of  the  Pilot  were landed  to  protect  the  wrecks.  Several  shots  were  fired  during  the night.
Sunday,  5th. — The  last  detachment  of  the  wrecked  troops,  after a  sojourn  of  55  days  on  this  most  inhospitable  island,  sailed  this  day for  Calcutta  in  the  Agnes  Lee.
The  voyage  was  most  prosperous,  the  several  ships  reaching  their destination  within  a  few  days  of  each  other.  The  detachments  of  the 10th  and  50th  Regiments  proceeded  on  to  Chinsurah  by  steam,  while the  detachment  of  the  80th  Regiment  landed  in  Calcutta  and  took  up their  quarters  in  Fort  William.
154  A  inSTOIlT  OF  DUE  RELATIONS
Thus  happily  terminated  one  of  the  most  trying  and  disastrous shipwrecks  on  record.
How  apparent  throughout  were  the  kind  and  merciful  acts  of  Provid- ence. Two  transports  from  opposite  quarters  of  the  globe  were  lost  on shore  within  a  mile  of  each  other,  each  possessed  of  stores,  etc.,  which the  other  was  deficient  in,  thus  mutually  affording  that  assistance  which was  most  required.  Had  the  vessels  beea  separated,  or  wrecked  on different  islands,  in  all  probability  how  diefereut  would  have  been  the result ;  how  fearful  the  loss  of  life,  had  not  the  hand  of  God  been mercifully  extended  towards  us  !
None  would  have  been  left  to  tell  the  tale  of  their  comrades'  fate and  sufferings.     Six  hundred  and  twenty  souls  are   cast  on  a  most inhospitable  and  proverbially  unhealthy  island,  short  of  every  descrip- tion  of   provision  and  comforts,   exposed   to  heavy  fatigues  under  a tropical  sun,  constantly  wet  for  the  first  fortnight  while  kndino-  8t0res through  the  surf  from  the    Runnymede,  scantily   clothed,   badly   fed and  pestered  and  annoyed  by  savages;  yet  wonderful  to  relate,  during the  54  days  they  remained  on  the  island  only  seven  adults  and   a   few children  died,  scarcely  a  common  average  !     What  may  not   indeed  be accomplished  by  British  soldiers  and  British  discipline  in  times  of  trial and  difficulty  such  as  these.     In  that  short  space  of  time  a  consider- able  portion  of  the  dense  jungle  was  cleared  from  around  the  encamp" ment,  wells  were  sunk,  a  work-shed,  sawpit,   and  forge  were  erected and  a  boat,  capable  of  carrying  2  5  persons,  completed.     Also  those  who' may  hereafter  visit  the  spot  will  find  a  tablet  in  a  rock  at  the  head  of the  bay  on  which  is  engraved  the  names  of  four  British  soldiers  of   the detachments  of  the  50th  and  80th  Regiments   who  died  on  the  island and  are  buried  near  this  shore  where  they  were  shipwrecked  on  the  12th November,  1814.     The  tablet  was  erected  by  their   comrades   in   Ja] nary,  1845.
These  islands  appear  to  be  but  little   known  and   very   incorrectlv Holding  out  no  inducement  to  trade  they  are  seldom  visited by  shipping.     Fruit  and  vegetables  are  not  to  be  found,  the   water   is in  general  bad,  and  difficult  to  procure.     The  soil  is,  however  remark
TV  ITU  THE  ANDAMANESE.
155
ably  fine,  and  no  doubt,  if  cultivated,  tropical  fruits  and  vegetables might  be  produced  in  abundance.
The  rocks  bordering  the  island  are  of  a  soft  description  of  sand- stone, while  the  beach  and  west  rocks  are  coral  formations.
Before  taking  our  departure  we  christened  it  Briton  Island, and  the  anchorage  Runnymede  Bay.  Latitude  12°  <i'  North, Longitude  93°  1 4'  East.,  by  observation.
Calcutta,  January,  18th,  1845.
NOTE. — As  will  be  seen  from  the  above,  the  Runnymede  was driven  on  shore  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from,  and  to  the  southward of,  the  Briton.  She  was  driven  on  to  the  reef,  stern  foremost,  and was  not  carried  over  it  as  the  Briton,  was.  Consequently,  nothing is  now,  after  a  lapse  of  50  years,  to  be  seen  of  her  remains.
The  reef  extends  an  eighth  of  a  mile  from  the  rocky  shore,  and  is dry  at  low  water.  It  appears  now  to  be  bare,  with  three  tiny  islets  of sandstone  rock,  covered  with  trees,  standing  on  it,  but  this  bareness  is probably  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  wrecked  people  cleared  away  the mangrove  swamp  then  existing.
The  remains  of  the  Briton  are  now  lying  on  the  reef,  at  the mouth  of  a  creek  and  mangrove  swamp,  and  small  mangrove  trees have  sprung  up  on  and  round  them,  but  there  is  no  doubt  from  the description,  that,  when  the  ship  was  cast  ashore,  a  large  mangrove swamp  existed,  into  which  she  was  tossed  by  the  cyclone  wave.
The  ships  were  really  wrecked  on  John  Lawrence  Island,  but  at  that time,  and  indeed  until  1830,  Kwang  Tung  Straits  were  unknown,  and John  and  Henry  Lawrence  Islands  were  believed  to  be  one  Island  join- ed near  the  narrow  strait  at  Garen-Le"bar.
The  description  give  a  of  the  state  of  the  jungle  after  the  cyclone will  remind  those  who  were  in  Port  Blair  in  November,  1891,  of  the state  of  the  jungle  round  the  Settlement  then.
The  Panther  seen  by  the  officers  was  probably  a  specimen  of the  Paradoxurus  Andamanesls.
No  trace  of  the  tablet  mentioned  in  the  above  account  can  be  found, though  the  steps  cut  in  the  rock,  leading  up  to  where  the  encampment
x  2
160
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
of  the  detachments  of  the  10th  and  50th  Regiments  was,  are  still  visi- ble. The  Andamanese  state  that  the  jungle  was  extensively  cleared, hut  it  has  now  entirely  covered  the  land  again,  and  no  specimens  of the  fruit  trees  and  vegetables  planted  by  the  people  have  been  seen.
The  Andamanese,  in  their  stories  of  the  wreck,  assert  in  their  usual boasting  way  that  they  we"e  continually  fighting  with  the  soldiers, and  that  they  killed  very  many  of  them.  They  also  state  that,  as  soon as  the  ships  were  cast  on  shore,  they  went  on  board  and  fought  the soldiers,  driving  them  back,  and  taking  every  thing  they  wanted.
They  certainly  looted  the  wrecks  after  the  parties  had  gone,  taking the  iron  but  leaving  the  brass,  and  all  that  is  now  left  is,  three  anchors, some  twisted  ribs,  pieces  of  the  keel,  numbers  of  brass  bolts,  and  the ship's  ballast,  which  appears  as  a  mere  heap  of  stones  rising  slightly above  the  level  of  the  swamp.
Before  approaching  the  occurrences  which  led  to,  and  the  docu- ments which  relate  to,  the  formation  of  the  present  Pennl  Settlement in  Port  Blair,  we  have  now  only  to  consider  "  Wanderings  in  the Islands  of  Interview,  (Andaman^,  Little  and  Great  Coco.  "  Pamphlet, Moulmein,  1850 ;  and  this  is  considered,  not  on  account  of  its  value,  for it  has  none,  but  on  account  of  the  mischief  it  might  have  done  by  mis- leading the  public,  and  especially  Dr.  Mouat's  party  in  1857.
To  quote  the  publication  in  full  would  occupy  more  space  than can  be  afforded  to  such  an  absurd  production,  and  the  following extracts  only  are  given,  from  which  the  value  of  the  remainder  of  the story  can  be  estimated.
The  author,  Mr.  Quigley,  appears  to  have  been  a  gentleman  of Moulmein,  who,  some  tune  prior  to,  or  in,  1850,  went  across  in  a  sail- ing vessel  to  the  Andamans  to  obtain  wreckage,  and  to  the  Coco  Islands to  get  cocoanuts.  He  writes  of  "  the  great  rise  and  fall  of  the  tides  at the  Andamans,  "  the  extreme  difference  between  high  and  low  water at  spring  tides  being  only  about  nine  feet ;  of  "  the  blue  gum  trees  on the  islands,  "  none  of  which  exist ;  of  the  quantities  of  coconut  trees  on Interview  Island,  which  also  do  not  exist ;  of  the  friendly  nature  of the  aborigines  with  whom  he  professes  to  have  become  on  the  most
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  157
intimate  relations  almost  from  the  first,  (a  most  dangerous  statement, and  one  likely  to  lead  to  the  massacre  of  trusting  voyagers);  of  the success  which  attended  his  cultivation  of  the  date  palm  of  the Andamans,  (which  notoriously  will  not  grow  in  so  damp  a  climate)> although  he  could  not  have  heen  long  enough  on  the  islands  for  the seeds  to  germinate ;  of  the  tigers  and  leopards,  not  one  of  which  is on  either  the  Andamans  or  Cocos ;  and  of  the  mild,  healthy,  equable climate.
He  asserted,  inter  alia,  that  the  Andamanese  do  not  care  for  iron,  and would  readily  pick  up  old  iron  from  some  wrecks  which  were  at  Inter- view Island  and  give  it  to  him,  because  they  thought  he  wanted  it ; the  real  fact  being  that  there  is  nothing  for  which  the  Andamanese are  so  greedy  as  for  iron.  Mr.  Quigley's  object  in  writing  such  a pamphlet  cannot  be  understood.  The  form  of  its  publication  forbids us  to  suppose  that  he  intended  it  for  a  novel,  and  I  cannot  think that  he  would  wilfully  mislead  the  public,  and  cause  people  to endanger  their  lives  by  going  to  the  Andamans  and  landing  freely among  the  aborigines,  trusting  to  his  account  of  their  friendliness.
Dr.  Mouat  rightly  describes  him  as  "a  modern  Munchausen,"  but there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Government  of  India,  and  the  Court  of Directors,  were  misled  by  Mr.  Quigley's  account  of  the  Islands,  which they  had  no  reason  for  disbelieving,  and  that  they  were  unable  to reconcile  his  statements  with  those  of  the  first  Superintendents  of Port  Blair,  and  under-estimated  the  difficulties  of  forming  the  Settle- ment. Dr.  Mouat,  indeed,  went  to  Interview  Island  in  the  hope  that, judging  from  Mr.  Quigley's  statements,  he  would  find  the  aborigines there  more  friendly  disposed  than  the  others  elsewhere  had  been. His  account,  given  later,  will  show  how  he  was  undeceived.
The  Andamanese  have  no  remembrance  of  Mr.  Quigley's  visit,  and he  probably  did  nothing  more  than  merely  touch  at  the  South  end  of Interview  Island,  when,  finding  how  hostile  the  aborigines  were,  he proceeded  to  the  Cocos  where  he  passed  the  remainder  of  the  time  he was  absent ;  unless  indeed  be  was  one  of  the  people  in  the  Sea  Ser- pent, which  vessel  twice  visited  Interview  Island  in  1849  and  1850 in  order  to  salve  the  remains  of  the  ship  Emily  which  had  been
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
wrecked  there  in  1849.  If  this  was  the  case  he  would  appear  to  have some  reason  for  speaking  well  of  the  ahorigines  ;  and  the  facts  related in  the  following  extract,  (if  true),  which  is  all  the  information  I  can  ob- tain on  the  subject,  would,  if  known  to  Dr.  Mouat,  entirely  justify  his confidence  in  the  Interview  Islanders,  and  his  hope  of  establishing friendly  relations  witli  them.
"  AN  OLD  TALE  OF  THE  SOUTH-WESTERN  MONSOON." Reprinted  from  the  June,  1883,  Number  of  Our  Mtnthly,  a  maga- zine published  in  Rangoon.
In  the  year  1849,  before  the  setting  in  of  the  South-West  Mon- soon, the  Brig  Flying  Fish,  Captain  Shaw,  from  Madras,  put  in  to the  Coco  Island,  which  is  situated  at  the  North  end  of  the  Andamans, for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  water.  There  were  two  passengers  on board,  Messrs.  Birch  and  McKnight,  who  were  emigrating  to  Aus- tralia, via  Singapore,  and  they  were  struck  with  the  beauty  of  the island.  The  features  of  the  coast,  covered  with  coco  and  other  trees, appeared  so  charming  in  their  eyes  that  they  abandoned  the  idea of  proceeding  to  Australia  and  resolved  to  settle  on  the  island.  Into this  view  Captain  Shaw  heartily  entered,  and  gave  every  assistance  in aid  of  the  undertaking,  and  further  promised  to  supply  the  settlers with  goats,  pigs,  fowls,  geese,  ducks,  and  also  plants  and  seeds  suitable to  the  climate.  On  the  island  there  were  no  animals,  excepting  rats, but  the  bays  were  found  to  abound  with  fish  of  various  kinds,  and turtle.  The  trees  on  the  island  were  of  the  finest  description,  and  its soil  of  good  quality  ;  in  some  places  clay  was  to  be  had  fit  for  making bricks,  and  in  others  it  consisted  of  a  fine  light  rich  loam,  which  pro- mised well  for  cultivation.  "Water  was  found  by  digging  wells  at  a depth  of  six  feet,  at  a  short  distance  from  the  shore.  This  island  had, from  time  to  time,  and  from  year  to  year,  been  resorted  to  by  the inhabitants  of  Tenasserim  and  Arracan  during  the  North-East  Mon- soon, for  the  purpose  of  collecting  the  coconuts  that  are  so  plentiful, and  also  employment  was  found  in  building  canoes  from  the  wood  oil trees  which  attain  a  large  size,  but  not  apparently  to  such  large  dimen- sions as  those  that  grow  on  the  mainland  of  British  Burma.  As  regards
WITH  THE  ANDAMAN  ESE.  159
this  island  as  a  place  of  shelter  for  ships  that  experience  bad  weather during  the  South- West  Monsoon,  a  nautical  friend  of  ours,  many  years since,  wrote  the  following  which  is  as  applicable  in  the  present  day as  it  was  in  the  past.
"  I  need  hardly  remind  the  mariner  of  the  importance  of  this  port of  shelter,  in  the  South-West  Monsoon,  where  he  can  refit  his  ship without  the  necessity  of  bearing  up  for  Calcutta  or  Moulmein,  and  any loss  of  spars  can  be  replaced  for  the  trouble  of  cutting  the  trees.  Two ships  from  Arracan  with  rice  found  shelter  here  from  a  three  days heavy  south-west  gale."
It  is  as  well  in  connection  with  this  to  draw  attention  to  the directions  for  entering  the  North  Bay.  "Coming  from  the  Westward, five  Slipper  Island  a  good  berth,  as  rocks  extend  from  the  points  a considerable  distance,  and  when  the  town  is  well  open,  steer  in  for the  flao-staff  until  Shaw's  Nose,  a  prominent  rock,  bears  East-South- East,  and  Birch  Point  West-South- West,  and  you  can  anchor  in  seven to  nine  fathoms  water.  Ships  coming  from  the  North  East  can  round Table  Island  at  half  a  mile  distance,  and  anchor  off  the  town  with  the flagstaff  bearing  South- West  in  8  to  12  fathoms  water.  No  ship should  venture  to  pass  between  Slipper  Island  and  the  Coco  without  a commanding  breeze,  as  the  rocks  extend  a  long  way  from  each  side and  there  is  a  heavy  race  of  4  to  5  knots  across  the  channel.  The rise  and  fall  of  tide  is  5  to  6  feet  at  springs,  and  sets  to  South-East and  North- West  six  hours  ".
Bidding  the  two  adventurous  immigrants  farewell,  and  promising a  speedy  return  to  the  island,  Captain  Shaw  set  sail  and  in  due  course reached  Moulmein.  The  North-East  Monsoon  had  not  died  out  but the  South -West  Monsoon  was  approaching  with  rapid  steps.  Not- withstanding this  fact,  the  nourishing  accounts  given  by  Captain  Shaw, in  which  he  thoroughly  himself  believed,  obtained  ready  listeners,  and some  few  were  speedily  inoculated  with  the  Coco  emigration  fever. At  the  period  of  which  we  write  Moulmein  was  in  a  highly  impecunious state.  Its  merchant  princes  were  not  above  borrowing  money  in  the bazar  at  from  2  per  cent,  per  mensem  upwards,  and  the  foresters  were paying  considerably  more  interest  to  carry  on  tbeir  operations  in  the
160
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
forests,  or  to  save  their  timber  that  had  arrived  at  Kado  from  being sacrificed  to  pay  various  debts  incurred.  The  buyers  of  piece-goods from  the  European  importers  were  lax  in  the  payment  of  their  promis- sory notes  when  due,  doing  so  by  driblets,  and  there  was  no  help  for it  apparently,  for  the  agents  and  firms  gave  in  to  the  purchasers,  and the  European  assistant  became  a  daily  bill  collector,  and  could  be seen  day  after  day,  passing  from  shop  to  shop  armed  with  his  promis- sory note  book,  and  rejoicing  if  he  could  help  fill  his  cash  bag  with unwillingly  given  instalments  of  small  sums,  where  thousands  of rupees  had  long  been  overdue.  In  those  days  there  were  no  banks and  accommodation  from  natives  meant  ruinous  interest.  Amongst high  and  low  impecuniosity  reigned,  so  the  glowing  accounts  of  the Coco  Island  induced  a  few  to  make  up  their  minds  to  try  their  fortunes on  it.
It  was  not,  however,  until  the  South-West  Monsoon  had  set  in, that  Captain  Shaw  started  with  his  small  batch  of  emigrants  from Moulmein  on  board  of  the  Flying  Fish,  he  having,  we  believe,  made an  intermediate  voyage.  It  is  needless  to  say  that  the  emigrants were  not  of  a  class  likely  to  succeed  in  such  an  adventure  as  they  had heedlessly  entered  upon.  The  very  fact  of  their  leaving  their  homes to  proceed  to  a  place  where  they  would  have  to  build  for  themselves shelter  in  the  height  of  the  rainy  and  inclement  season,  clearly  demon- strated their  ignorance  of  the  hardships  they  would  inevitably  incur.
At  about  the  middle  of  the  month  of  July,  1849,  the  Flying  fish arrived  with  the  emigrants  at  her  destination.  Instead  of  putting into  our  own  words  that  which  took  place  on  their  landing,  and  what occurred  at  the  outset  during  the  month  of  July,  we  shall  place before  our  readers  a  small  portion  of  the  journal  kept  by  one  of  the emigrants,  which  speaks  for  itself  as  to  the  incapacity  of  the  settlers. We  commence  at  a  place  in  the  journal  the  most  fitting,  as  that which  precedes  it  can  interest  no  one.  There  is  no  date  to  this  ex- tract,  but  the  extracts  which  follow  each  other  give  the  days  on  which the  words  were  written  down.
"At   sunset  we   got   underweigh,    bound   directly  to   the   Great Cocos,  where  we  arrived  on  Saturday,  with  the  wind,  (plenty  of  rain),
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
161
from  the  southward,  and  having  worked  through  the  Moscos.  We here  found  Mr.  McKuight  sick,  and  heard  that  Mr.  Birch  had  gone over  to  the  "turtle  place"  to  get  turtle  and  eggs,  they  being  hard  up for  everything.  McKnight,  Shaw,  and  myself  went  ashore,  it  was rather  dark  to  make  out  anything;  but  on  entering  Birch's  house everything  presented  a  gloomy  appearance.  On  landing  I  fervently offered  up  my  prayers  in  secret,  that  He  who  watches  all  our  actions would  bless  us  and  prosper  our  present  undertakings.  We  returned on  board  with  McKnight  who  slept  there,  and  on  the  following  morn- ing, Sunday,  the  loth  July,  some  of  the  crew,  Shaw,  Stewart,  and  self went  on  shore  to  help  McKnight  to  clear  away  the  hill  in  front  of  his house  which  he  is  building  ;  had  breakfast  and  dinner  on  shore  and then  went  on  board  to  sleep.  While  at  dinner  we  were  joined  by Birch,  to  whom  I  was  introduced  by  Shaw.
"18th  July. — Shaw  left  us,  talcing  all  our    good  wishes  with   him and  a  speedy  return  to  us  all ;  we  all  went  on   board   to   see   him   off, and  he  took  us   out   some   distance.     Birch,    McKnight,   and   James went  in  the  small  boat,  which  Shaw  had  left  us  with  two   lascars    for Stewart  and  family.     The   immigrants   now   on  the   island   may   be enumerated  thus — Stewart,  his  wife  and  child,  Birch  and    McKnight, self,  wife  and  three  children.     Ma  Mentha,  and  son,   and   her   sister. There  are  several  other  Burmese  who  have  come  here   merely  for   the purpose    of    gathering  coconuts.      I    ought    to   mention    that    my wife's  mother,  and  four  Burmese  came  with  us  for  the  same    purpose, but  I  think  I  never  came  across  a  more  disobliging  people  before,  they all  had  a  free  passage  here,  but  not  a  hand  stir  of  work  will   they   do to  assist  any  of  us.     Birch,  Stewart,  and  myself  made  up  our  minds  to go  out  catching  fish  with  the  root  of  a  tree  which  is  found  abundantly here,  and  had  proceeded  some  distance  when   we   altered   our   minds, (Birch  having  first  informed  us  that  it  was  only  an  hour's  good  walk) to  visit  the  turtle  place,  but  to  my  regret  or  sorrow,  I  found  it  took  us the  whole  day,  however  we  returned   home  and  had  at  one  time  every prospect  of  sleeping  in  the  jungle."
"  19th  J  uly. — A  vessel  passed.
"  21st  July. — Stewart  and  self  went  over  in  the  long  boat   to   the
HISTOEY  OF  DUE  RELATIONS
Table  and  Slipper,  the  breakers  were  running  high,  and  Providence appears  to  have  directed  our  little  craft  amongst  the  rocks,  which  we did  not  perceive  until  low  water,  after  having  gathered  a  quantity  of coconuts  and  heaped  up  53  or  54,  we  launched  the  boat  on  to  the  flat and  loaded  her.  We  then  had  to  wait  until  the  tide  made  with  our knees  up  in  the  water  ;  coming  on  dark  and  squally  looking  from  the southward.  Launched  the  boat  during  one  of  the  lulls  and  began pulling  over  ;  were  met  by  the  race,  (anything  but  pleasant),  never wish  to  be  in  another.  Arrived  safe  at  home.
"22nd  July,  —  No  work,  every  one  reading,  what  I  don't  know.
"  23rd.  July.  —  Stewart  and  self  went  up  to  the  Table  Hill,  so  I call  it  because  there  is  a  splendid  tableland  on  the  top  of  it.  We made  up  our  minds  to  build  our  houses  on  the  top  of  it  and  cut  a path  down  to  the  foot.
"24th  July.  —  Went  up  with  Stewart  and  commenced  clearing away,  he  taking  the  right  hand,  and  self  the  left  hand  ;  found  plenty of  briars  and  thorns.
"  25th  July.  —  Went  with  Johnny  out  fishing,  caught  enough  to last  Stewart  and  self  for  two  days.  After  breakfast,  Stewart  and  self, with  Birch  and  three  hands,  went  to  Table  Hill  and  cleared  away. Two  vessels  passed.
"  26th  July.  —  This  day  commenced  gloomy  with  every  inclination to  rain,  and  so  it  did  :  throughout  the  night  it  rained  excessively.  No work.  A  brig  passed  this  morning,  standing  South-East.
"  27th  July.  —  Morning  rainy,  throughout  rainy  and  miserable weather.  The  waterman  pretended  sick,  made  him  turn  to  and  work, found  nothing  the  mattsr  with  him.  Oiled  my  gun  —  my  wife  washing  I McKnight  very  ill  and  delirious  towards  night.
"  28th  July.  —  This  day  fine  weather  throughout.  Lizzy  laid  up with  sore  eyes  and  fever.  Little  Harry  sore  eyes.  McKnight  still very  ill.  Self  laid  up  with  sore  legs.
"  29th  July.  —  Fine  throughout  the  day.  We  made  up  our  mindsi to  go  as  far  as  the  small  island  on  South-East  part  of  the  island,  but soon  afterwards  altered  our  minds  and  had  a  stroll  to  the  "  Well  "  and proceeded  to  visit  the  plantains,  but  could  not  get  there  on  account  of
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
163
the  mud.  McKnight  has  been  ill  all  day,  and  towards  the  evenin^  he felt,  himself  so  much  worse  that  he  entirely  gave  himself  up.  The evening  of  this  day  was  rainy.
"30th  July. — Fine  weather  this  morning.  McKnight  much better,  went  up  to  the  Table  Hill  and  cleared  away  a  little  more  of the  jungle.  Waterman  sick,  I  went  myself  to  the  tank  and  fetched a  pitcher  of  water,  necessity  has  no  laws.  Evening  fine,  but  a  miser- able looking  sky.
"  31st  July. — Rainy  all  night.  Daylight  commenced  with  fine weather  which  continued  until  about  5  P.M  ,  when  it  began  to  blow from  the  South- West  with  rain.  Lizzy,  I  may  say,  well ;  Margaret with  sore  eyes  and  a  little  fever  on  her.  Harry  and  Moggy  sore  eyes, the  latter  feverish,  my  wife's  mother  very  ill.  The  waterman  pre- tending sick  refused  to  give  him  rice.  I  ordered  him  to  the  tank  to get  water,  he  took  the  water  pot  up  and  went  his  way.  Soon  after whilst  I  was  walking  on  the  beach  going  up  the  hill,  I  saw  my  water pot  just  about  high  water  mark,  and  the  bird  flown  away;  gave  chase after  him  but  lost  all  traces  of  his  footprints.  In  the  evening  heard  he was  at  my  wife's  mother's  hut  eating  rice.  I  went  there  immediately and  remonstrated  with  him,  he  went  back  to  his  own  hut.  The  cook has  had  an  attack  of  the  fever  and  ague  during  the  day,  when  he  got up  he  complained  of  a  severe  headache.  Margaret  and  I  cooked  the breakfast  and  washed  up  the  articles.  Went  up  the  lull  for  a  few hours  and  cleared  away  the  jungle."
The  island  had  now  got  its  full  complement  of  settlers,  for  we have  not  heard  that  any  one  else  after  the  landing  of  the  Moulmein party  joined  them  in  their  rash  undertaking.  The  few  extracts  of  the journal  we  have  made  are  evidences  of  the  folly  of  those,  who,  taking their  wives  and  families  to  such  a  place,  ran  headlong  into  all  kinds of  misery,  from  which  the  survivors  were  rescued  through  the  falling out  of  certain  circumstances  that  happened,  and  which  we  propose  to relate.  The  many  months  the  settlers  were  on  the  islands  were  months replete  with  agony  to  the  residents,  sickness  at  first  and  ultimately want,  amounting  to  starvation,  adding  to  the  misery.  No  wonder
T2
]  64  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
several  of  them  fell  a  prey  to  despondency  which  in  some  cases  almost amounted  to  mental  derangement.  Some  of  them  died,  and  those  who were  rescued  from  that  fate  were  brought  away  from  the  island  in  an utter  state  of  destitution,  emaciated  in  body,  and  almost  silly  in  intel- lect. The  state  in  which  the  survivors  were  found  was  so  deplorable, that,  had  not  timely  aid  been  rendered,  there  is  little  reason  to  doubt that  the  whole  of  them  would  have  succumbed,  and  the  island  would have  become  a  sea-washed  graveyard.
It  will  be  seen  by  referring  back  that  Captain  Shaw  left  the island  in  the  Flying  Fish  after  landing  the  emigrants  on  the  18th July,  18 19.  To  what  port  he  was  bound  from  thence  we  do  not  know, but  it  was  his  intention  to  visit  the  island  at  intervals  to  take  stores to  it,  and  to  keep  up  communication  with  the  mainland  at  the  differ- ent parts  of  the  Bay  of  Bengal  to  which  he  traded.  We  have  no  in- formation upon  which  we  can  state  positively  that  he  revisited  the island,  but  our  impression  is  that  he  did  not  do  so,  being  prevented  by the  turning  over  of  bis  vessel  when  on  a  voyage  from  the  Nicobars, loaded  with  coconuts.  News  certainly  did  not  reach  Moulmein  as  to the  state  of  the  settlers  on  the  Cocos  until  the  close  of  the  South- West  Monsoon  of  1849,  and  that  came  about  in  a  most  extraordi- nary manner.
Before  we  speak  of  the  circumstances  of  the  wreck  of  the  Flying Fish  we  have  to  relate  what  occurred  to  a  vessel  called  the  Emily.
On  the  1st  September  she  was  totally  wrecked  on  the  Andamans and  had  it  not  been  for  this  mishap,  the  probability  is  that  the  settlers on  the  Coco  Island  would  all  have  perished  miserably.  Instead  of giving  a  summary  of  the  account  of  the  wreck  of  the  Emily,  we think  it  better  that  the  Commander  of  that  ill-fated  ship  should  speak for  himself,  as  we  have  before  us  his  narrative  of  that  unfortunate occurrence,  containing  particulars  well  worth  reading,  and  also  the account  of  his  reaching  Rangoon  with  a  portion  of  his  crew  in  an  open boat.  From  thence  he  came  to  Moulmein,  and  the  authorities  sent the  H.  C.  S.  Proserpine,  Captain  Brooking,  to  the  scene  of  the disaster.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
The  letter  of  Captain  Anderson  of  the  Emily  is  addressed  to  his owners,  and  we  now  direct  the  attention  of  our  readers  to  it,  for  it  will amply  repay  perusal.
CAPTAIN  P.  ANDERSON'S  ACCOUNT.
"  I  regret  to  have  to  announce  to  you  the  total  loss  of  the  ship Emily  on  one  of  the  small  islands  lying  to  the  west  side  of  the North  Andamans,  in  latitude  by  account  about  12°  50'  N.
"The  night  was  dark  and  rainy,  with  heavy  parsing  squalls,  and had  been  so  for  three  days  previous,  so  that  no  observation  could  be obtained  by  either  sun,  moon,  or  stars,  during  that  time.  But  pre- vious to  that,  by  good  observations,  I  was  200  miles  to  the  North-  West of  all  the  Andamans,  the  ship  laying  South,  and  South  by  West,  the most  of  the  time.  I  also  made  an  allowance  for  currents  to  the  iiast. North-East  of  25  miles  d;dly,  but  that,  it  appears,  was  not  sufficient, as  I  fully  anticipated  passing  to  the  Westward  clear  of  all  the  islands not  less  than  70  miles.  The  sad  disaster  took  place  at  4  A.M.,  on  the 1st  day  of  September,  notwithstanding  two  look-outs  on  the  fore- castle, and  one  on  each  gangway  at  the  time,  still  the  low  island  was not  seen  until  the  ship  was  just  amongst  the  breakers.  The  ship  at the  time  being  under  single  reef  topsails,  reef  courses,  jib  and  mizen. I  saw  immediately  there  was  no  room  for  the  ship  either  to  wear  or stay.  I  then  had  all  sails  clewed  up,  and  the  best  bower  anchor  let go  in  20  fathoms  with  70  fathoms  cable,  which  brought  the  ship  up for  a  time.  The  main  mast  was  then  cut  away,  which  took  with  it the  mizen  topmast,  as  I  thought  at  the  time  the  ship  might  ride  it  out if  they  were  all  cut  away.  But  the  mainmast  had  not  been  over  the side  many  minutes,  when  a  terrific  squall  came  from  the  westward, whijh  made  the  ship  drive  stern  on  to  a  barren  reef,  which  appeared to  surround  the  island  about  f  of  a  mile  off  shore,  with  smooth  water inside  of  it  from  four  to  six  feet  deep.  I  next  had  the  chain  slipped,  so that  she  might  drive  further  on  and  make  a  bed  for  herself,  as  she was  striking  very  heavily,  and  the  sea  making  a  complete  breach  over her  fore  topmast  head.  She  bilged  and  filled  forward  almost  imme- diately, her  head  being  down  in  deeper  water.  A  raft  was  then  con-
1(56  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RElATlOtfS
structed  with  a  view  of  saving  our  lives,  and  put  over  the  side  after the  tide  bad  fallen  considerably,  but  the  first  man  that  went  on  was washed  off  immediately,  however,  he  being  a  good  swimmer  was  saved by  reaching  the  shore.  The  warp  that  the  raft  was  fast  by  broke, and  the  raft  itself  taken  out  by  the  breakwater  (?  backwater)  through the  surf  and  out  to  sea.
"  The  next  day  the  pinnace  was  brought  in  tackle  over  the  rail, Mr.  Hosburgh,  Chief  Officer,  Syrang,  two  seacunnies,  and  five  lascars got  in  with  some  bread,  clothing,  etc.  The  boat  was  lowered  the moment  a  little  smooth  came,  and  they  all  reached  the  shore  in  safety, but  not  without  steering  the  boat  amongst  the  rocks.  The  next  day the  long  boat  was  got  over  the  rails  in  the  same  manner,  a  few  bags of  bread  put  into  her,  compasses,  charts,  nautical  instruments,  chrono- meters, muskets,  pistols,  gunpowder,  log  book,  ship's  papers,  some clothing,  etc ,  but  owing  to  so  many  of  the  crew  rushing  into  her before  they  were  told,  one  of  the  tackles  fouled,  and  being  let  go before  the  other,  three  heavy  seas  came  at  the  time  and  swamped  the boat  alongside,  five  men  were  washed  ashore,  four  drowned  alongside, and  the  remainder  hauled  on  board  by  ropes.  Everything  was  washed out  of  the  long  boat  and  she  drove  amongst  the  rocks.  There  was only  now  one  small  boat  left  which  I  attempted  to  land  with  the next  day,  taking  with  me  two  Europeans,  the  carpenter,  and  three seacunnies.  I  wished  Mr.  Allhusen,  a  passenger,  to  come  with  me, but  he  declined,  saying,  "  we  would  never  reach  the  shore,"  although I  had  at  the  time  every  confidence  we  would.  I  also  took  with  me some  sheets  of  paper,  nails,  pump  leather,  oak'um,  pitch,  and  other articles  to  repair  the  other  boats  with.  "We  waited  for  a  little  smooth and  lowered  away.  The  first  two  seas  that  followed  we  got  over  very well,  but  the  third  came  and  turned  the  boat  completely  over  end,  and leaving  us  all  struggling  in  the  surf  :  however,  the  men  were  all  washed ashore  alive,  whilst  myself  and  one  European  were  taken  out  by  the breakwater,  (?  backwater),  through  the  surf  again,  right  under  the ship's  stem  where  we  both  succeeded  in  getting  hold  of  ropes  that were  thrown  to  us,  and  were  handed  on  board  more  dead  than  alive. I  was  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  in  the  water,  and  unable  to  swim,  I
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
had  on  one  of  the  safety  swimming  bolts  which  saved  me.  Every- thing in  the  boat  of  course  was  lost,  and  the  boat  by  the  breakwater, (?  backwater)  taken  out  to  sea.  About  three  hours  after  this,  it  be- came low  water,  and  one  of  the  Europeans  volunteered  to  try  and reach  inside  the  breakers  with  a  small  line,  which  he  succeeded  in doing,  but  was  almost  gone.  Two  or  three  lascars  followed  to  assist in  hauling  any  of  us  on  shore.  I  wished  all  the  Europeans  to  go  be- fore me,  but  none  of  them  seemed  willing  to  do  so.  Mr.  Allhusen said  he  would  follow  me  if  I  would  go  first,  which  I  did  ;  I  lowered myself  down  by  the  mizen  boom  end,  keeping  hold  of  the  line  that communicated  with  the  shore,  and  when  the  first  heavy  sea  came plunged  into  it  ;  by  the  time  the  third  one  came  I  was  among  the rocks  but  quite  helpless  ;  the  men  that  were  on  shore  came  and  saved me,  my  strength  was  completely  gone.  Mr.  Allhusen  followed  me and  got  also  safe  on  shore,  so  did  Joseph  Moffat,  apprentice  ;  but  I regret  to  say  Robert  James  Burn,  apprentice,  was  drowned  in  the attempt.
"  No  more  could  be  done  that  night,  as  the  ebb  was  flowing  fast. Next  day,  the  remainder  came,  with  the  exception  of  Mr.  Simpkin, Second  Officer  ;  who  preferred  remaining  on  the  wreck  to  running  the risk  of  being  washed  on  shore.  After  getting  inside  the  breakers  and smooth  water  we  had.  to  walk  three  quarters  of  a  mile  over  coral  rocks to  reach  the  beach,  the  water  being  three  and  four  feet  deep  ;  this  on our  bare  feet,  having  nothing  on  but  shirts  and  trousers.  It  was awful,  like  walking  over  so  much  broken  glass  ;  we  got  cut  and  man- gled about  the  feet  and  legs  dreadfully,  and  I  have  not  been  able  to walk  since.
"  We  had  not  been  many  hours  on  the  island  before  the  native savages  came  down  upon  us  with  their  bows  and  arrows,  one  of  the arrows  passed  within  three  inches  of  the  boy  Moffat.  We  had  noth- ing to  defend  ourselves  with,  but  we  all  got  large  sticks  and  held  them up  like  arms,  which  I  suppose  the  savages  took  them  for,  as  they  re- turned to  the  bush  shortly  after.  We,  at  the  time,  being  about  thirty of  us  on  the  beach,  making  the  best  show  of  our  number.  I  think they  were  afraid  to  attack  us  until  they  could  muster  a  stronger  force.
A  HISTOEY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
No  doubt,  they  went  away  for  that  purpose  and  would  likely  have come  down  upon  us  during  the  night  had  we  not  immediately  set  to •work  to  get  the  long  boat  and  pinnace  patched  up  as  well  as  we could  —  fortunately  a  sheet  of  copper  off  the  ship's  bottom  was  washed on  shore  and  with  it  we  stopped  a  large  hole  in  the  pinnace,  other- wise I  do  not  know  how  we  should  have  got  off.  About  9  P.M.  we were  ready  for  launching  the  boats,  and  having  previously  picked  up a  few  pieces  of  pork  and  beef  which  had  been  washed  on  shore  from the  long  boat,  divided  these,  giving  each  boat  in  proportion  to  its crew,  but  it  was  with  the  greatest  difficulty  that  I  could  persuade  any one  to  come  into  the  pinnace  with  the  exception  of  Mr.  Allhusen  and two  of  the  Europeans,  every  one  wanting  to  go  in  the  long  boat,  I suppose  because  the  pinnace  was  small  and  very  leaky,  constantly requiring  three  men  to  keep  her  free  of  water.  At  last  I  got  into  the pinnace  with  Messrs.  Allhusen,  Frederick,  Urquhart,  and  Joseph Moffat,  three  seacunnies,  three  lascars,  and  the  carpenter.  Our eatables  and  drinkables  consisted  of  one  piece  of  beef  and  pork,  and an  oil  tin  containing  four  gallons  of  water.  Mr.  Hosburgh,  Chief Officer,  at  the  same  time  got  into  the  long  boat  with  the  remainder  of the  crew,  having  with  them  six  or  eight  pieces  of  pork  and  beef,  a few  pounds  of  wet  biscuits  (the  remainder  of  a  bag  that  had  been washed  out  of  the  long  boat),  and  a  few  gallons  of  water  which  they had  in  the  pots  handy  ;  both  boats  then  started  to  leave  that  inhospi- table island.
"  We  pulled  along  the  shore  inside  the  breakers  looking  for  an opening  to  get  out  of,  but  did  not  succeed  in  finding  one  that  night. At  about  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  the  tide  fell,  and  left  both  boats dry  on  a  coral  reef.  Here  we  lay  till  daylight,  when  we  fortunately discovered  a  small  opening  through  the  breakers,  about  the  breadth  of n  ship,  where  the  sea  only  broke  occasionally.  We  then  parted  com- pany as  we  could  not  be  of  the  slighte-t  assistance  to  each  other. Our  boat  drawing  less  water  than  the  long  boat  floated  sooner  and  got out  first  ;  from  that  time  we  saw  nothing  more  of  the  long  boat,  I nad  told  Mr.  Hosbuvgu  I  should  try  and  make  the  Cocos  Islands,  and for  him  to  do  the  same,  if  possible.  This,  however,  I  did  not  succeed
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
in,  not  having  any  compass  to  steer  by  nor  any  nautical  instrument to  take  an  observation  with.  The  same  evening  it  came  on  to  blow and  rain  heavily,  so  that  we  knew  not  which  way  we  were  steering, with  a  boat  so  lenky  that  we  could  scarcely  keep  her  free,  and  havin»
O
only  three  oars  and  a  lascar's  blanket  as  a  substitute  for  a  sail,  our situation  was  anything  but  pleasant,  having  no  clothing  and  covering but  what  we  stood   in.     The   next   morning   we  found   ourselves  in amongst    small  islands   which   I  took  to  lay  at  the  north  end  of  the Andamans.     We  were  among  these  islands  for  four  days,  trying  to get  a  landing  place  upon  one  of  them,   which,  as  they   were  mostly surrounded  with   breakers,  it  was  difficult  to  do  ;  at  last  we  succeeded in  getting  on  an  uninhabited  island,  having  only  a  pint  of  water  left. We  hauled  the  boat  up  on  the  beach  intending  to  stop  that  night  and get  some  rest.     We  went  in  search  of  water  and  fortunately  found  it a  very  small   distance  in  the  bush,  although  rather  brackish  it  was very  acceptable.     We  then  got  everything  out  of  the  boat,  with  the intention  of  trying  to  make  her  a  little  tighter  the  next  day  before starting  again,  and  had  just  got  a  resting  place  made  for  the  night under   some  trees,   when   a  Brig   was  discovered  coming   round    the island.    This  cheered  us  up  considerably,  the  boat  was  immediately launched,  everything  put  into  her  with  the  exception  of  our  remain- ing piece  of  beef  which  in  the  hurry  was  forgotten.     We  pulled  and sailed  after  her  for  upwards  of  an  hour  and  got  within  a  mile  of  her when  they  saw  us  and  hove  to,  which  was  a  joyful  sight  to  us  allj  but this  was  only  for  a  short  period  as  after  she  had  laid  to  for  abou-fc  ten minutes,  sad  was  our  disappointment  when  we  saw  her  square  her yards,  set  her  fore-topsail  and  lower  studding  sails  and  go  away  and leave  us,  although  only  half  a  mile  distant.      No   doubt  they  were afraid  we  were  pirates  coming  from  one  of  the  cannibal  islands.     I steered  after  her  until  darkness  hid  her  from  our  view.     It  was  the more  annoying  as  the  only  morsel  we  had  to  eat  was  left  on  the  shore where  the  current  would  not  allow  us  to  return.     This  caused  a  great depression  to  our  spirits  ;  however,  there  was  nothing  now  left  but  to try  and  reach  the  Burma  coast,  which  was  steered  for  as  near  as  we possibly  could,  but  owing  to  almost  continual  rains,  sun,  moon,  and
170
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
stars  were  seldom  visible,  which  made  it  difficult  to  steer  anything like  a  straight  course,  the  wind  being  what  we  principally  went  by. I  always  steered  the  boat  myself  the  whole  of  the  night  from  the  time we  left  the  wreck  until  we  reached  the  coast,  in  case  of  any  of  the stars  coming  out  that  we  might  kuow  we  were  steering  something  like the  proper  course.  In  nine  or  ten  days  after  the  brig  leaving  us,  we made  land.
"  The  crew,  with  the  exception  of  Mr.  Allhusen  and  myself,  ap- peared to  suffer  a  great  deal  from  hunger  by  this  time,  and  some  of them  almost  gave  up,  but  fortunately  next  day  we  discovered  two  or three  huts  and  landed,  but  found  them  deserted.  We  took  posses- sion, got  a  fire  on,  stripped  and  dried  our  clothes  and  went  in  search of  something  to  eat,  and  found  some  pumpkins,  cucumbers,  and  a  few shellfish  which  were  devoured  with  a  great  relish.  "We  left  these huts  on  the  third  day,  launched  the  boat,  and  steered  along  the  coast to  the  eastward  as  I  still  thought  we  were  to  the  westward  of  Rangoon. The  same  afternoon  we  saw  an  entrance  into  a  small  river,  when  we pulled  six  or  eight  miles  up  and  discovered  a  village  inhabited.  We landed  and  found  the  people  very  kind,  they  gave  us  fish  and  rice  to eat,  and  made  us  two  large  fires  to  dry  our  clothes,  it  having  been raining  in  torrents  the  whole  day  :  we  rested  here  three  days.  We abandoned  our  boat,  she  being  too  leaky  to  venture  to  sea  again,  and agreed  with  these  people  to  bring  us  on  to  Rangoon  for  the  sum  of Us.  120,  as  they  told  us  we  were  still  about  40  miles  to  the  west- ward of  the  latter  place ;  we  came  on  in  inland  passages  through rivers  and  creeks,  and  arrived  there  twenty-two  days  from  the  wreck. We  received  the  kindest  hospitality  from  Captain  and  Mrs.  Crisp,  and Captain  Brown."
This  ends  the  narrative  of  Captain  Anderson,  which  no  one  can read  without  a  feeling  of  admiration  for  the  noble  seaman,  who, throughout  all  the  difficulties,  dangers,  and  disappointments  with which  he  was  beset  from  the  day  of  the  wreck  of  the  Emily,  never lost  his  presence  of  mind,  never  gave  way  to  despondency,  but  under the  most  perverse  and  discouraging  circumstances  bravely  fought  his
WITH  THR  ANDAMANESE.
171
way,  and  at  the  last,  resorting  to  the  worse  boat  of  the  two  which  had been  washed  ashore,  without  compass  or  any  nautical  instrument, with  only  three  oars  in  the  boat  and  a  lascar's  blanket  for  a  sail,  and latterly  without  food,  kept  up  the  spirits  of  the  few  companions  he had  with  him  and  so  reached  the  coast  of  Burma.  He  even  offers  an apology  for  those  on  board  the  Brig,  who  deserted  him  when  within half  a  mile  of  his  boat,  by  giving  them  the  benefit  of  the  supposition that  they  might  take  him  for  a  pirate,  when  they  squared  yards  and sailed  away.
As  regards  those  who  were  in  the  long  boat  we  have  never  heard any  more,  what  their  fate  was  we  are  quite  ignorant,  but  of  the Second  Officer  who  refused  to  leave  the  vessel,  further  on  particulars will  be  given.
We  now  turn  our  attention  to  Captain  Shaw,  the  Commander  of the  Flying  Fish.  To  his  return  to  the  Coco  Island,  the  settlers thereon  were,  in  the  months  of  September  and  October,  anxiously looking  forward,  inasmuch  as  their  stores  had  begun  to  fail,  and  those procurable  on  the  island  only  consisted  of  turtles,  turtles'  eggs,  fish and  coconuts.  Besides  which  they  were  suffering  from  fever,  dysen. tery,  and  other  complaints,  brought  on  by  a  mode  of  life  they  had been  unaccustomed  to,  and  being  subjected  to  the  inclemency  of  the season,  and  living  in  dwellings  that  were  mere  hovels,  their  spirits became  depressed,  and  despair  succeeding  to  discontent  they  became more  like  an  unfortunate  shipwrecked  party,  than  immigrants  who had  landed  to  make  a  new  home.
In  the  month  of  October  the  Flying  Fish  was  completing  her lading  of  coconuts  at  the  Nicobars,  it  being  the  intention  of  Captain Shaw  to  proceed  from  thence  to  Moulmein,  and,  after  discharging  the cargo  at  that  port,  to  revisit  the  Settlement  that  he  had  founded. He  set  sail  from  the  Nicobars  in  October  and  immediately  experienced very  bad  weather.  The  Brig  commenced  making  water,  which gained  upon  the  pumps  so  rapidly  that  she  in  a  few  days  became water-logged.  This  had  the  effect  of  making  her  so  crank  that  there was  nothing  left  but  to  put  her  before  the  wind,  for  the  slightest
*B z2
172
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
deviation  from  that  plan  caused  her  to  heel  over  ;  so  that  with  every slight  change  of  wind  her  course  had  to  be  altered.  Night  and  day her  Commander  had  an  anxious  time  of  it,  and  all  hands  had  to  be constantly  on  the  alert.  This  continued  for  a  day  or  t^vo.  The morning  of  the  15th  October  arrived,  and  at  about  2  o'clock  the catastrophe  came.  All  of  a  sudden  she  gave  a  lurch  and  turned  over. The  crew  who  had  behaved  well  and  obeyed  the  orders  of  their Commander  were  horror-struck  at  this  sudden  disaster,  and  gave  rent to  their  feelings  by  a  yell  of  despair,  for  they  thought  that  their  hour had  come ;  but  they  were  soon  animated  by  the  warning  voice  of their  Commander  who  checked  their  fears  by  assuring  them  that  there was  no  fear  of  the  vessel  sinking,  as  the  cargo,  consisting  entirely  of coconuts,  would  keep  her  from  doing  so.
It  is  a  singular  fact  that  not  a  life  was  lost  when  the  Brig  cap- sized ;  and  the  crew,  when  they  heard  the  cheering  voice  of  their Commander,  recovered  from  their  momentary  panic  and  scrambled aft  on  the  bilge  of  the  ill-fated  vessel.  On  that  quarter  of  the  fly- ing Fish  which  was  immersed  in  the  sea  the  vessel's  gig  was  made fast  to  the  davits,  but  it  fortunately  happened  that  a  sampan  was  on the  quarter  that  was  above  water.  This  sampan,  a  day  or  two  before, Captain  Shaw  had  been  busy  in  rendering  serviceable  in  anticipation of  her  being  useful  in  case  of  accident.  In  her  were  tools,  nails,  and canvas,  which  had  been  left  there  the  day  previous  to  the  event  that we  have  described.  The  vessel  had  turned  over  at  2  A.M.,  but  so soon  as  day  dawned  on  the  group  of  mariners  who  were  clinging  on the  bilge,  Captain  Shaw  set  to  work  with  them  to  continue  the  neces- sary work  of  making  the  sampan  seaworthy.
Another  fortunate  circumstance  had  occurred  which  raised  the hopes  and  spirits  of  the  mariners ; — this  was  that  two  casks  of  water were  found  in  the  waist  of  the  vessel  which  was  uppermost.  These casks  were  not  damaged  when  the  vessel  turned  over.  Had  it  not been  for  this  favourable  event  the  unfortunates  would  have  been without  water.  In  the  course  of  this  eventful  day  Captain  Shaw ordered  some  of  his  crew  to  make  an  attempt  to  release  the  gig  which •was  under  water.  This  most  difficult  job  was  effected  by  the  men
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  173
employed  in  it  diving  to  the  depth  of  about  14  feet  and  cutting  the ropes  that  fastened  her  adrift.  The  boat  rose  to  the  surface,  was  se- cured by  the  swimmers,  and  brought  alongside  the  sampan,  which, before  the  day  closed,  was  rendered  serviceable  by  nailing  a  canvas bulwark  round  her.  Captain  Shaw  and  his  crew  then  left  the  ill- fated  Flying  Fish  and  steered  for  Narcondam  ;  this  place  was  reached in  about  28  hours  from  the  time  the  Brig  was  deserted.
A  more  inhospitable  place  than  this  Narcondam  could  not  well be  devised  by  nature,  yet  Captain  Shaw  and  his  crew  managed  to survive  on  it  certainly  in  a  most  miserable  condition,  for  all  they  had to  subsist  on  was  what  they  managed  to  pick  up  on  the  beach. Captain  Shaw,  before  the  accident  had  happened  to  his  vessel,  had been  suffering  from  fever ;  now  he  became  dangerously  ill  from  ex- posure and  the  want  of  proper  food.  The  only  covering  he  and  his crew  had  to  protect  themselves  from  the  inclemency  of  the  weather was  the  boat  turned  upside  down,  the  sides  being  banked  up  with sand.  But  the  weather  was  wet,  the  sand  was  damp,  and  their sufferings  from  the  cold  they  experienced  were  extreme.  Everything depended  on  one  man,  and  that  was  Captain  Shaw.  By  his  coolness and  adaptability  of  circumstances  to  the  end,  he  had  succeeded  in saving  the  lives  of  all  those  who  were  with  him  when  the  Flying Fish  capsized,  and  had  with  them  reached  terra  firtna,  but  here they  were  in  a  place  where  all  would  likely  perish  from  sickness  or starvation.  Feeling  then  that  the  lives  of  these  were  dependent solely  upon  his  exertions,  he  determined  to  make  an  attempt  to  reach the  Cocos — a  distance  of  about  70  miles  from  where  he  was.  Hav- ing been  18  days  at  Narcondam,  he  started  on  the  3rd  of  November on  his  little  voyage  on  the  sampan,  accompanied  by  his  Syrang  and a  few  lascars.  He  left  the  gig  with  the  remainder  of  the  crew  on Narcondam,  urging  the  men  to  be  of  good  cheer  and  not  to  despond ; for,  if  he  reached  the  Cocos,  their  safety  would  be  assured.  He  ran a  great  many  risks  on  his  passage  to  the  Cocos ;  he  was  frequently  in great  danger,  for  on  many  occasions  the  sampan  was  nearly  being swamped.  However,  escaping  these  perils,  he  sighted  the  Coco  Island, and  then  made  it.  Instead  of  arriving  at  a  flourishing  Settlement,
174
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
and  receiving  a  warm  greeting  from  his  friends,  be  found  the  Schooner Sea  Serpent  there  just  on  the  point  of  sailing  for  Interview Island  to  recover  what  could  be  saved  from  the  wrecked  Emily which  had  been  sold  for  the  benefit  of  the  concerned  at  Moulmein, and  had  been  purchased  by  the  owners  of  the  Sea,  Serpent.  Had Captain  Shaw  arrived  a  few  hours  later  he  would  have  found  the island  deserted,  excepting  by  a  few  Burmese.  He  and  his  men  went on  board  the  Sea,  Serpent  and,  in  December,  arrived  safely  at Moulmein  from  Interview  Island,  the  vessel  haying  been  very  success- ful in  saving  things  from  the  wrecked  Emily.
As  regards  the  men  left  at  Narcondam,  the  following  extract shows  how  they  were  rescued.  It  is  a  report  from  Captain  Forsyth of  the  ship  Manchester  who  arrived  in  Calcutta  from  the  Straits  : —
"  On  the  27th  November,  close  in  with  the  North  side  of  Narcon- dam Island,  picked  up  a  boat  with  one  seacunnie  and  four  lascars belonging  to  the  brig  flying  Fish  of  Moulmein  ;  they  reported  there were  six  men  on  the  island — sent  a  boat  on  shore  and  brought  them off.
"By  their  report  the  Brig  was  lost  on  her  passage  from  the Nicobars  to  Penang  somewhere  to  the  westward  of  Barren  Island,  on or  about  the  17th  October.  Captain  Shaw  after  living  on  Narcondam 18  days,  left  for  the  Cocos  in  a  Chinese  sampan,  taking  with  him  one seacunnie,  the  Syrang,  and  four  lascars,  promising  as  soon  as  possible to  send  a  boat  for  the  remainder  of  the  crew.
"On  the  28th  November,  I  went  on  shore  at  the  Settlement  on the  north-end  of  the  Cocos,  and  found  that  Captain  Shaw  had  arrived there  but  had  gone  to  Moulmein  along  with  the  Englishmen  who  had been  living  there.  They  had  proceeded  thither  on  board  of  a  steamer a  few  days  before  I  arrived.  This  intelligence  I  received  from  the Burmese  who  are  staying  on  the  island  to  collect  coconuts."
The  above  information  has  but  one  error  in  it  as  regards  Captain Shaw.  The  steamer  Proserpine  had  heard  nothing  of  Captain Shaw,  when  Captain  Brooking,  her  Commander,  put  in  at  the  Cocos, and,  after  he  returned  from  the  scene  of  the  Emily's  wreck,
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  175
brought  away  the  survivors  of  the  settlers.  This  is  easily  accounted for  as  Captain  Forsyth  got  the  particulars  from  the  Burmese,  and there  may  have  arisen  some  confusion  from  the  difficulty  of  impart- ing the  news  correctly.  However,  it  is  not  quite  clear,  for  we  do  not know  on  what  day  Captain  Shaw  arrived  at  the  Cocos  and  found  the Sea  Serpent  there  and  on  the  point  of  departure.  The  probability is  that  the  Manchester  put  into  the  island  after  the  Sea  Serpent had  left,  and  her  Commander  failed  in  learning  from  the  Burmese that  she  had  ever  been  there.
We  have  mentioned  the  Proserpine  steamer,  and  as  we  have told  our  readers  of  the  perilous  escapes  of  Captain  Shaw,  and  of  his having  arrived  safely  at  Moulmein,  it  is  now  the  proper  time  to  go  a wee  bit  back  to  relate  what  was  done  when  Captain  Anderson  of  the wrecked  Emily  arrived  there  and  informed  the  authorities  of  the misfortune  that  had  overtaken  him.  Very  little  time  was  lost  after the  news  came  to  hand,  and  H.  C.  S.  Proserpine  was  ordered  to proceed  to  the  scene  of  the  disaster  with  all  speed.  Captain  Brooking, being  a  Commander  who  never  let  the  grass  grow  under  his  feet, started  from  Moulmein  on  the  20th  October,  and  as  his  report  gives particulars  of  not  only  what  he  did  at  the  wreck,  hut  also  of  his  call- ing in  at  the  Settlement  of  the  Northern  Cocos,  we  now  place  it  be- fore our  readers.  Captain  Anderson  accompanied  him  and  was  of great  assistance.   
Dated  Monlmein,  29th  October,  1849.
From — Captain  BROOKING,  Commander,  H.  C.  S.  V.  Proserpine. To — Major  BOGLE,  Commissioner  of  the  Tenasserim  Provinces.
"  I  have  the  honor  to  report  the  return  to  this  place  of  the  H. C.  Steamer  under  my  command,  and  also  that  the  vessel  will  be  again ready  for  sea  after  completing  fuel,  after,  I  regret  to  state,  an  unsuc- cessful search  among  the  Andamans,  and  islands  adjacent  to  the Andamans,  for  the  missing  portion  of  the  crew  of  the  late  ship  Emily. The  particulars  relative  to  the  search  are  as  undermentioned.
"  I  further  regret  having  to  report  that,  on  visiting  the  Northern Cocos,  I  found  the  then  remaining  settlers  in  great  distress,  one-half
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
of  their  original  number  having  fallen  victims  to  fever,  and  the  re- mainder, from  the  effects  of  that  malady  and  starvation,  in  so  reduced a  state  as  to  be  unable  to  leave  their  houses  in  quest  of  food  ;  under these  circumstances,  added  to  their  imploring  that  I  would  take  them off  the  island,  I  determined  to  call  for  them  on  my  return  from  Inter- view Island.  I  sent  them  supplies,  with  medical  assistance  from  the Surgeon,  and  proceeded  to  the  South.
"20th  October,  1849.—  At  7  A.M.,  having  completed  coal,  had steam  up,  cast  off,  and  in  accordance  to  an  order,  No.  280,  from Major  Bogle,  Commissioner,  proceeded  with  all  despatch  down  the river,  towards  the  Andaman  Islands,  in  search  of  the  missing  portion of  the  crew  of  the  wrecked  ship  Emily,  Mr.  Anderson,  late  Master  of that  vessel  on  board  by  order.
"  Wind  of  moderate  power.  West-south-west,  cloudy  weather. Barometer  29°-98'.  10  A.M.,  rounded  the  reef  buoy  of  Amherst; threatening  appearance  at  South-west,  heavy  southern  swell.  Baro- meter 28°-0'-0."  Sea  on,  ship  labouring  heavily.  Barometer  29°-95/ The  weather  still  continuing  to  look  threatening,  deemed  it  advis- able to  return  to  port.  Bore  up  and  returned  to  the  anchorage  off Amherst,  sent  second  cutter  under  charge  of  Mr.  Rean,  second  officer* up  the  river  to  make  enquiry  from  a  schooner  which  had  arrived  from Kangoon,  if  any  intelligence  of  the  missing  parties  had  reached that  place.  Midnight.  —  Fresh  breeze  from  the  South-west.  Cloudy weather.
"  21st  October.  —  At  11  A.M.,  Mr.  Rean  returned  from  town,  not having  gained  any  intelligence  of  the  missing  party.  5  P.M.,  the flood  having  slackened,  weighed  and  proceeded  ;  fine  weather  and  sea gone  down.
"  22nd  October.  —  Steaming  towards  the  Northern  Cocos.  Fine weather.
"  23rd  October.  —  At  daylight  sighted  the  Northern  Cocos  bear- ing South-west,  steered  for  the  Settlement  on  the  North  end,  called  in but  could  gain  no  information  of  the  missing  men,  found  the  settlers in  great  distress,  sent  supplies  and  medical  assistance,  they  imploring to  be  taken  off  the  island  ;  promised,  if  possible,  I  would  call  on  my
WITH  THE  ANDAMANKSE.
177
return  and  take  them  away.  Proceeded  to  the  South  close  outside the  Western  reef,  along  the  edge  of  the  breakers,  examining  the  shore, with  officers  looking  out  aloft,  hut  no  signs  of  either  boat  or  people. Then  proceeded  to  the  South  Cocos,  and  succeeded  before  dark  in closely  examining  that  island  in  the  same  manner  as  above,  with  no success.  Proceeded  under  easy  steam  for  the  night,  stood  towards Landfall  Island.
"  24th  October. — At  daylight  stood  in  and  examined  Landfall Island,  keeping,  as  yesterday,  close  to  the  breakers  on  the  edge  of  the reef,  but  saw  nothing.  Stood  on  and  examined  the  North-west  coast of  the  Great  Andaman.  Owing  to  the  incorrect  survey  of  this  coast was  obliged  to  have  the  cutters  ahead  sounding  on  several  parts  of the  coast,  which  added  much  to  the  anxiety  and  also  to  the  work  of the  crew.  This  Island  appears  to  be  thickly  inhabited  by  a  hostile people,  as  the  natives  came  armed  to  the  beach  watching  our  move- ments. At  sunset  recalled  the  boats  ;  no  signs  of  boat  or  people  being seen  this  day,  stood  off  and  on  under  easy  steam  for  the  night  abreast of  a  long  low  point.  Saddle  Mountain  North-east  by  east.
"  25th  October. — At  daylight  continued  the  search  from  the point  of  last  night's  bearing,  proceeding  as  yesterday,  sounding  in  the boats  ahead.  8  A.M. — Commenced  the  Northern  end  of  Interview Island.  Natives  coming  to  the  beach,  armed  as  on  the  other  Island, observed  some  with  clothes  on,  supposed  the  same  to  have  been  stolen from  the  wreck,  as  these  were  the  first  seen  with  any  one  article  of clothing  on.  9  A.M. — Sighted  the  wreck.  Natives  very  numerous  on the  beach,  all  armed.  9-30. — Stood  close  in  and  anchored  ahead  of the  wreck.
"  From  the  circumstance  of  the  natives  having  all  run  into  the jungle  and  no  one  being  seen  on  board,  feared  that  the  Second  Officer who  was  left  on  the  wreck  had  met  a  violent  death,  which  I  am sorry  to  say  was  found  to  be  the  case  on  our  boarding  the  vessel. Proceeded  under  cover  of  the  steamer's  guns  with  the  first  and second  cutters  armed,  the  former  under  charge  of  myself,  and  the latter  that  of  Mr.  Peche,  Third  Officer,  taking  with  us  Dr.  Lawson, Mr.  Anderson,  and  the  European  First  and  Second  Engineers,  prepared
178
A    HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
in  case  any  of  the  natives  should  he  concealed  on  board,  when  to  our horror  we  found,  lying  on  the  deck,  the  mangled  remains  of  the  late 2nd  Officer  (Surgeon's  report  on  which  is  here  attached),  the  ship plundered  of  every  moveahle  article,  and  everything  denoting  wilful destruction  of  property.  After  being  on  board  but  a  few  minutes, the  look-out  man  reported  the  natives  collecting  and  approaching  the wreck  inside  the  reef  she  was  then  on  ;  observed  fires  on  the  heights on  the  coast,  which  no  doubt  were  beacons,  as  in  an  incredibly  short space  of  time  more  than  200  natives  had  collected  on  the  beach,  all armed  with  spears,  bows,  etc.,  and  as  others  were  fast  approaching from  all  directions  with  the  main  body  moving  towards  the  wreck, and  judging  from  their  gestures  that  their  intentions  were  hostile, and  that  an  attempt  would  be  made  to  cut  our  party  off  as  they  now neared  us  to  a  very  short  distance,  and  others  were  observed  lurking among  the  rocks  close  to  the  wreck,  thought  it  advisable  to  disperse so  large  a  body,  so  gave  directions  for  Mr.  Boan,  Pirst  Officer,  to  open fire  on  them  from  the  steamer,  which  was  done,  quickly  and  in  good style.  To  show  their  daring  not  a  man  among  them  would  move  on the  first  round,  but  on  the  second  round  coming  quickly  and  the  shot falling  fairly  among  them,  a  general  yell  was  raised,  and  dropping their  arms,  they  one  and  all  took  to  flight.  Our  24  and  9  pounders kept  them  at  this  pace  for  a  long  distance  on  the  beach,  and,  as  may be  supposed,  we  were  not  again  troubled  by  them.  At  sunset,  having brought  a  few  things  from  off  the  wreck,  and  having  warned  in writing,  on  several  places  on  the  wreck,  any  parties  calling  there  to beware  of  the  natives,  weighed  and  proceeded  to  the  North,  all  re- gretting that  we  had  been  unsuccessful  in  our  search.  Midnight cloudy.  We  observed  several  fires  on  the  Island.
"  26th  October. — At  daylight  sighted  the  North  Cocos,  bearing North-east  by  north.  Cloudy  weather  with  much  rain.  8-30  A.M. — Anchored  off  the  North  end  of  the  Island  inside  the  Table  and  Slipper Islands,  and  embarked  the  remaining  settlers,  consisting  of  twelve(uien, women,  and  children),  whom  we  found  much  benefited  by  the" aid rendered  them  on  our  former  visit,  although  many  still  too  weak  to be  able  to  walk  to  the  boats.  1-30  P.M. — Weighed  and  proceeded
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
towards  the  Preparis  Islands  ;  thick  cloudy  weather,  with  much  rain. The  weather  having  no  signs  of  clearing,  and  the  fuel  getting  low, deemed  it  advisable  to  return  to  Amherst  direct,  knowing  also  they would  he  safe  on  the  Island  as  ships  pass  close  to  it  daily.  Arrived at  Amherst  at  sunset  on  the  28th.
"  In  continuation  of  this  report,  I  beg  to  point  out  the  ready assistance  at  all  times  rendered  by  Mr.  Anderson,  whose  anxiety  for the  missing  crew  was  plainly  shown  by  his  never  leaving  the  look-out at  the  mast  head  in  all  weathers,  and  I  entertain  the  same  feeling  of hope  with  him  that  the  boat  and  crew  have  most  probably  gone  to sea,  and  have  been  picked  up  by  some  passing  vessel,  as  we  saw  many openings  in  the  reef  where  a  boat  could  pass  through  in  safety  in  any weather."
"We  have  now  seen  in  what  a  deplorable  condition  the  settlers  at the  Great  Coco  were  found  on  Captain  Brooking  calling  at  the  island on  his  trip  in  search  of  the  21  missing  mariners  from  whom  Captain Anderson  had  parted  when  he  left  Interview  Island  on  his  perilous voyage  in  a  small  open  boat.  Of  the  settlers,  seven  died,  including adults  and  children.  One,  Mr.  McKnight,  had  previously  been  taken off  the  island  by  a  vessel  called  the  JLneaa  which  had  called  there, and  the  remainder  were  rescued  by  Captain  Brooking  and  brought  to Moulmein.  One  of  these,  Mr.  Birch,  succumbed  to  the  fever  that  he could  not  shake  off  ;  a  few  months  after  landing  at  that  Port,  the  rest recovered.
The  following  remarks  written  at  the  period  of  the  emigrants' return  may  prove  interesting  :  —
"  It  would  appear  that  the  dwellings  of  the  emigrants  were  low hovels,  not  raised  from  the  ground,  and  consequently  within  reach of  the  malaria  n  exhalations  so  destructive  to  human  life.  Situated there,  with  little  or  no  employment,  during  the  worst  months  of  the year,  fever  and  ague  soon  commenced  their  ravages  ;  one  after  the other  the  emigrants  were  seized  with  the  disease  ;  the  excitement consequent  on  landing  at  a  new  place  gave  way  to  gloomy  forebod- ings ;  the  novelty  no  longer  existed,  and  when  death  came  amongst
2A2
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
them,  glad  would  they  have  been  to  exchange  places  with  the  veriest cooly  in  the  Tenasserim  Provinces.  This  is  not  the  first  expedition  of the  sort  that  has  borne  the  same  bitter  fruits.  Settlements  have  been tried  on  the  Andamans,  years  since,  and  on  other  islands  near  them  ; expeditions  in  which  every  necessary  and  comfort  of  life  have  accom- panied the  emigrants,  and  in  which  nothing  has  been  left  undone  to ensure  success,  but  they  have  failed  from  the  unhealthiness  of  the Settlements.  How  then  was  it  to  be  expected  that  the  emigrants of  1849  would  be  able  to  combat  against  the  adverse  circumstances that  stared  them  in  the  face.  No  persuasion  would  stop  them  from proceeding  to  a  place  which  was  destined  to  be  the  graveyard  of  one third  of  the  little  party.  Go  they  would,  prepared  or  unprepared,  and in  a  season  which  produced  anticipations  of  the  most  gloomy  descrip  • tion  for  their  fate,  amongst  people  who  were  not  bitten  with  the emigrating  fever,  but  whose  anticipations  hare  fallen  far  short  of  the painful  reality.
"  The  life  of  man  hangs  but  on  a  thread,  and  it  is  singular,  but  no less  true,  that  sixteen  lives  have  been  saved  from  the  circumstance of  a  vessel  being  wrecked  on  the  Andamans,  —  we  mean  the  Emily. When  Captain  Anderson  was  steering  his  frail  boat  for  the  coast  of Burma,  his  thoughts  were  of  those  who  like  himself,  were  at  the  mercy of  the  waves.  Little  did  he  suppose  that  his  providential  escape would  be  the  means  of  rescuing  a  number  of  his  fellow-creatures from  the  jaws  of  death,  whom  he  had  never  seen,  but  whose  lot  he> at  the  time  he  left  the  Andamans,  wished  to  share  for  a  time,  or  looked to  the  island  for  succour  ;  and  when  he  failed  to  reach  the  Cocos thought  that  his  greatest  chance  of  escape  from  death  was  taken from  him.  If  he  bad  succeeded  in  joining  the  immigrants,  it  is  far from  improbable  that  he  and  all  on  the  island  would  have  perished, as  we  should  have  been  ignorant  of  their  state,  and  the  steamer  would not  hare  proceeded  thither.  Perhaps  his  only  chance  would  have been  to  take  to  his  boat  again  ;  but  many  circumstances  might  have occurred  to  render  even  that  impossible.
"  The  island  will  present  a  most  melancholy  appearance  to  the next  vessel  that  puts  in  there  —  the  deserted  hovels,  the  graves,  and  the
WITH  THE  ANDAMANE3E.
silence  where  onco  voices  were  heard,  will  chill  the  heart  of  the  person. who  lands  there  expecting  to  meet  a  little  group  of  enquiring settlers."
The  writer  of  the  above  did  not  anticipate  that  a  few  years  would demonstrate  that  the  Andamans  and  Nicohars  (I)  under  Settlements made  hy  the  Indian  Government  would  prove  healthy  enough  places to  live  in,  hoth  as  regards  Europeans  and  Natives  from  different  parts of  India.
In  connection  with  this  tale  of  disasters  and  rescues  we  have  had occasion  to  mention  the  Sea  Serpent,  which  Schooner  made  two trips  to  Interview  Island  to  recover  what  she  could  from  the  wrecked Emily,  and  was  so  fortunate  as  to  pick  up  at  the  Cocos  Captain Shaw,  on  the  day  he  arrived  in  the  sampan,  and  after  the  island  had been  deserted  by  the  settlers.
Captain  Brooking  of  the  Proserpine  in  his  report  relates  how hostile  the  natives  of  Interview  Island  were,  and  that  he  had  to  use persuasion  in  the  shape  of  24  and  9  pounders.  He  left  notices  on  the wreck  warning  future  visitors  to  be  on  their  guard,  but  the  Com- mander and  crew  of  the  Sea  Serpent  found  the  natives  very  friendly indeed  ;  they  came  down  to  the  wreck  and  mixed  with  the  crew  of  the Schooner,  even  assisting  them  in  their  work,  and  voluntarily  return- ing articles  they  had  plundered  from  the  wreck,  copper  sheets  among the  rest  of  the  loot  being  brought  down  to  the  beach  and  restored.
It  was  always  thought  that  these  islanders  were  cannibals,  but they  —  at  least  those  who  came  to  the  wreck  —  do  not  appear  to  have been  eaters  of  meat  either  in  its  fresh  or  salted  condition,  as  they  did not  feast  on  the  Second  Officer  they  killed  on  board,  and  although they  broke  open  the  casks  containing  pickled  beef  and  pork,  they simply  contented  themselves  with  throwing  the  pieces  of  meat  about the  deck  and  hold.
The  following  extract  is  worth  reading  :  —
"  The  Second  Mate  of  the  Emily,  it  is  very  evident,  was  mur. dered,  and  that  he,  also,  died  surrounded  by  savages;  here  then  was  an opportunity  for  indulging  in  a  cannibal  feast  if  they  were  addicted
182
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
to  such  a  propensity.  The  only  part  of  the  body  wanting  was  the cap  of  the  head  which  had  been  removed  by  a  blunt  saw  and  carried away,  most  likely  as  a  trophy."
The  savages  had  made  away  with  all  the  biscuits  and  every  bottle of  liquor  on  board,  amongst  which  were  beer,  champagne,  sherry,  etc,, so  it  is  not  unlikely  they  consumed  these  and  enjoyed  themselves after  their  kind.
In  a  journal  of  a  second  voyage  to  the  Andamans  kept  by  one  of those  who  was  on  board  the  Sea  Serpent,  we  come  across  a  passage in  which  mention  is  made  of  the  docility  of  an  Andamanese  youth r and  as  it  shows  the  friendly  relations  that  existed  between  the  island- ers and  the  crew  of  the  Schooner  we  have  au  excuse  for  inserting  it here.
"29th  June,  1850. — The   natives  of  the  island  have  made  their appearance,  and  having  seen  us  are  approaching.     We  miss  our  old friend  of  the  last  voyage,  but  a  youngster  has  come  in  his  stead.     We gave  him  some  coconuts,  and  invited  him  to  sit  in  the  boat.   He  took the  best  seat,  eyed   the  muskets   in  the  boat,  and  laughed  at  them. Mr.  Thomas  Sangspee  took  up  a  cigar,  struck  fire  from  the  musket, and  began  to  smoke,  when  he  laid  hold  of  him  by  the  arm  and  begged for  a  cheroot  too.     A  Burmese  cigar  was   handed   to  him  which  he lighted  himself,  and  no  Turk  could  enjoy  his  hookah  with  greater  con- tentment.    He  seemed  surprised  at  the  manner  the  fire  was  obtained. He  was  well  acquainted  with  the  effect  of  a  musket,  and  was   not   in the  least  alarmed  at  having  one  fired  off  near  him,  yet  it  excited  his curiosity  to  know  how  fire  was  obtained   by   only   throwing   a    little powder  into  the  pan  without  a  discharge  from   the   barrel.     It   was explained  to  him,  and  he  laughed  at  the   explanation.     This   youth's body  was   scarified   in    horizontal  stripes,    the   cicatrices    of   which were  at  least  about  half  an  inch  in  diameter.     His  body   was   daubed with  titshe  or  red  ochre.     He  had  a  shell  attached  to   a   string   round his  waist.     The  string  was   represented  to  me   to  be  similar  to  those worn  by  the  Nicobarians.     The  edges  of  the  shell  all  round  were  very sharp,  and  formed  their  knife,  as  with  it  he  very  readily  cut  a  coconut
WITH  THiC  ANDAMANESK.  J83
that  was  given  to  him.  The  knife  after  this  operation  was  taken from  him  by  Mr.  B.  and  thrown  away,  when  he  good-hunaouredly  got out  of  the  hoat  and  went  for  it,  and  expressed  by  signs  that  it  was  of great  use  to  him.  Several  other  natives  approached  and  looked  on  at the  proceedings."
After  all  had  been  obtained  that  could  be  saved  from  the  wreck she  was  left  to  her  fate,  and  the  natives  after  a  time  set  fire  to  the hull  for  the  purpose,  we  suppose,  of  getting  at  the  iron  bolts  and screws.  The  Flying  Fish  was  met  with  rolling  about  in  the  sea by  more  than  one  vessel;  ultimately  she  stranded  on  the  Cocos,  and  the Burmese  there  burnt  her  also,  for  the  sake  of  the  iron  in  her  hull. This  completes  our  tale,  and  that  tale  shows,  from  the  various  inci- dents related,  how  in  real  life  circumstances  are  more  or  less  connected and  how  dependent  mankind  is  upon  them  whether  for  good  or  for evil.  The  misfortunes  of  many  have  an  influence  on  the  fortunes  of others,  and  in  the  every  day  whirlpool  of  human  existence  "  the unexpected  happens  "  and,  therefore,  we  should,  under  all  trials,  be thankful  for  what  we  receive,  never  despair  but  work  on  and  hope  for the  best."
Notes  on  the  above  account.
The  Coco  Islands  are  situated  to  the  North  of  the  Andaman  Group of  which  they  form  a  geological  continuation,  the  Coco  Channel separating  the  two  Groups  ;  the  distance  from  the  North  end  of  Land- fall Island,  the  most  northerly  of  the  Andaman  Group,  to  the  South end  of  of  the  Little  Coco  is  22  miles.
Unlike  the  Andaman  Islands,  the  Cocos  are  uninhabited,  and  are fringed  with  coconut  trees,  the  collection  of  the  fruit  from  which appears  to  have  attracted  Burmese  traders  for  a  long  period.
The  above  account  is  especially  interesting  as  being  the  first  we have  of  any  attempted  settlement  of  Europeans  on  the  Coco  Islands. Since  1850  the  Islands  have  been  leased  at  intervals  to  speculators  in coconuts  and  timber  by  the  Burma  Government,  but  the  subsequent settlements  have  not  been  successful.
The  Coco  Islands  were,  until  1879,  under  the  jurisdiction   of  the
184  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
Chief  Commissioner  of  the  Andamans,  but  in  that  year  were  trans- ferred to  the  Burma  Government,  as  the  Light-house  on  Table  Island is  under  the  control  of  the  Rangoon  Marine  authorities.
Messrs.  Birch  and  McKnight's  Settlement  appears  to  have  been  on the  Northern  end  of  the  Great  Coco,  and  the  anchorage  for  ships  was  in Marshall  Channel  where  there  is  a  strong  current  and  bad  holding ground.  The  settlers  had  had  no  experience  to  fit  them  for  such  an experiment,  and  indeed  seem  to  have  been  specially  unsuited  for  the life  they  selected.
The  Emily  was  driven  on  shore  on  the  reef  fringing  Interview Island  near  the  South-western  corner  of  that  Island.
It  is  easy  to  understand  the  attitude  of  the  Andamanese  as  de- scribed by  Captains  Anderson  and  Brooking,  which  was  exactly  what might  have  been  expected,  though  they  most  probably  took  bottles of  liquor  for  the  sake  of  the  glass  and  not  on  account  of  the  spirits  they contained,  but  the  extracts  from  the  journal  of  the  traveller  in  the Sea  Serpent  are  less  easy  of  comprehension.
No  account  is  given  of  the  action  of  the  Andamanese  towards  the crew  of  the  Sea  Serpent  when  they  met  for  the  first  time,  and  we  are not  told  what  led  up  to  the  very  friendly  relations  which  existed  on the  part  of  some  at  least  of  the  savages  with  the  Europeans.
The  description  of  the  North  Andaman  style  of  tattooing  and  of  the use  of  the  Cyrena  shell  knife  are  too  accurate  to  have  been  invented,  or to  have  been  observed  had  the  Andamanese  been  hostile,  and  one  is forced  to  conclude  that  the  Andamanese  were,  for  the  only  time  on record  before  1858,  (except  during  the  Settlements  of  1790-96),  on friendly  terms  with  a  few  Europeans.  Mr.  Quigley's  obviously  fic- titious accounts  of  the  Flora  and  Fauna  of  the  Island  cast  a  doubt  on everything  he  wrote,  but  he  appears  to  have  had  some  grounds  for saying  that  the  aborigines  on  Interview  Island  were  well  disposed towards  strangers.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
CHAPTER  VI.
Murder  of  three  seamen  of  the  Fyze  Buksh  by  the  Andamanese — Decision  of  the Government  of  India  to  establish  a  Settlement  on  the  Islands— The  Aborigines were  not  to  be  harmed — Case  of  the  Fuen  Oren—^lr.  Dalrymple's  letter — Mr. Grey's  letter — Captain  Hopkinson's  letter — Sir  A.  Bogle's  letter — Mr.  Hanghton's letter,  and  the  accompanying  depositions — Despatch  to  the  India  Office,  and  Reply — Despatch  to  the  India  Office.
IT  would  seem  that,  during  the  first  half  of  the  present  century, no  special  precautions,  by  keeping  Government  vessels  cruising  in  the neighbourhood  of  the  Andamans,  were  taken,  either  to  protect  the aborigines  from  the  cruelties  of  the  Malays  who  kidnapped  them,  or, on  the  other  hand,  to  protect  inoffensive  travellers  who  incautiously touched  at  the  Andamans  for  wood  or  water  from  being  massacred by  the  Andamanese.  We  hear,  in  1855,  of  the  Sesostris  cruising at  the  Nicobars,  and  that  within  two  years  six  vessels  (one  of  which was  commanded  by  an  Englishman)  had  been  cut  off  by  "  the  mild and  inoffensive  Nicobarians,"  whose  character  was  now  being  better understood.
On  the  13th  January,  1855,  it  was  reported  that  three  seamen  of the  Fyze  Buksh  of  Moulmein  had  been  murdered,  and  four  others wounded,  by  the  aborigines  at  the  Andamans.  The  Principal  Assist- ant Commissioner  at  Akyab  notes  that  there  are  repeated  instances  of attacks  by  the  Andamanese  on  the  defenceless  crews  of  ships.
Prom  the  following  correspondence  it  would  appear  that  the  out- rages committed  by  the  Andamanese  on  ship-wrecked  seamen  were notorious,  and  had  drawn  the  attention  of  the  Government  of  India on  more  than  one  occasion,  though  the  details  of  these  I  have  not  been able  to  obtain.  They  probably  consisted,  as  did  the  outrages  in  later times,  of  the  landing  on  the  islands  by  sailors  in  search  of  wood  or water,  and  their  indiscriminate  massacre,  and  the  destruction  of  their boats,  by  the  aborigines.
These  papers  also  show  that  it  was  decided  that  the  Settlement
should  be  a  Penal  Colony,  before  the  outbreak  of  the  Indian   Mutiny,
SB
A  HISTORY  OP  ODE  RELATIONS
which  actually  delayed  its  establishment,   although,   when  founded, mutineers  were  at  first  the  principal  prisoners  there.
The  idea  of  having  a  colony  on  the  Andamans  was  entertained owing  to  the  behaviour  of  the  Andamanese,  which,  and  not  the  Mutiny, was  the  sole  cause  of  the  country  being  occupied.
I  have  often  heard  it  asserted  that  we  occupied  the  Islands  after the  Mutiny  in  order  to  have  some  distant  and  safe  place  across  the sea  to  send  our  rebels  and  criminals  to,  when  in  the  state  of  the  coun- try it  would  not  have  been  safe  to  keep  them  in  India  ;  and  that  the Andamanese  have  been  killed  off  as  a  natural  result  of  the  occupation, and  their  country  taken  from  them  without  their  consent  and  for  no fault  of  their  own.  But  such  was  not  the  case.  Long  before  the Mutiny  the  conduct  of  the  Andamanese  had  made  it  imperative  that the  Islands  should  be  occupied,  and  friendly  relations  established with  the  Aborigines,  and  this  would  have  been  done  sooner  had  the Mutiny  not  broken  out.
Further,  both  the  Government  of  India  and  the  Court  of  Direc- tors, repeatedly,  and  in  the  strongest  terms,  ordered  that  the  Anda- manese were  not  to  be  injured,  ill-treated,  or  allowed  to  suffer  in  any way  from  our  occupation  of  their  Islands,  and  when  very  occasional cases  of  improper  behaviour  towards  the  Andamanese  occurred,  the Government  expressed  their  extreme  displeasure  with  the  parties  in fault.
I  would  draw  special  attention  to  Captain  Hopkinson's  letter among  the  following  documents  quoted,  as  it  is  one  of  the  ablest Minutes  on  the  Andaman  Islands  which  has  been  written.  He  fore- saw difficulties,  and  advised  the  action  which  should  be  taken  thereon, years  before  these  actually  occurred  :  he  was  in  favour  of  the  occupa- tion of  the  Nicobar  Islands  simultaneously  with  that  of  the  Anda- mans, a  step  which,  however,  for  various  reasons  could  not  be  taken until  1869  ;  and  of  the  annexation  of  the  whole  of  the  Andaman Islands,  and  not  a  portion  only,  which  policy  was  carried  out.
He  advised  that  the  new  Settlement  should  be  on  tho  South-  West part  of  the  Islands,  which  is  noteworthy,  for  it  is  only  lately,  when the  opening  out  of  the  Settlement  has  shown  us  what  the  Islands  are
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  137
like,  that  some  hold  the  opinion  that,  good  as  Port  Blair  is  as  a  site for  a  Settlement,  yet  that  Port  Mouat,  the  Labyrinth  Islands,  Mac- Pherson's  Straits,  and  Rutland  Island,  would  probably,  both  for sanitary  and  strategic  reasons,  have  been  better.
His  advice  regarding  the  Penal  Colony  is  being  acted  on  to  the present  day,  though  there  is  no  intention  of  allowing  the  Penal  Settle- ment to  merge  into  a  Free  Colony  as  he  suggests,  probably  deriving his  views  from  the  example  of  New  South  Wales,  and  Singapore.
He  seems  to  have  had  an  idea  that  the  Burmese  intended  to  have founded  a  colony  of  their  own  at  the  Andamans,  but  on  this  point  no data  are  given.
Port  Andaman,  regarding  which  he  is  favourably  disposed, (following  Lieutenant  Blair's  reports),  would  not  have  done  for  a site  for  the  Settlement.  The  "  Port  "  merely  consists  of  the  Strait between  Interview  Island  and  the  mainland,  and  though  a  Settlement could  have  been  established  on  the  Island,  where  however  the  soil, is  poor,  the  existence  of  the  huge  and  pestilential  swamp  on  the  East- ern side  of  the  Strait  would  have  caused  a  sick  and  death  rate  which must  have  shortly  led  to  an  abandonment  of  the  Andamans,  similar to  that  of  Port  Cornwallis  in  1796.
While  Captain  Hopkinson's  letter  was  before  the  Government  of India  further  papers  were  forwarded  from  Moulmein  containing  an account  of  the  murder  of  some  Chinese  sailors  at  the  Andamans which  are  of  great  interest.  The  account  may,  I  think,  be  taken  as typical,  and  is  one  out  of  many  similar  occurrences.
Mr.  Haughton,  in  forwarding  the  statements  of  the  sailors,  shows that  three  British  vessels  had  been  cast  away  on,  or  in  the  neigh- bourhood of,  the  Andamans  within  a  year.  He  also  comments  on  the careless  navigation  of  the  Chinese.
It  is  difficult  to  decide  exactly  whore  the  Fuen  Or  en  really went.  A  long,  low  island  would  correspond  to  the  Little  Andaman, and  an  island  with  a  grassy  plain  on  the  northern  side  of  it,  and  a hill  on  the  south,  might  be  either  the  Cinque  Islands,  or  Passage Island.  The  whole  statement  is  obviously,  though  perhaps  not  inten- tionally, false  in  its  details,  the  geography  given  not  corresponding  to
2n2
188
A  HISTOKY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
any  part  of  either  the  Andamans  or  the  Nicobars,  and  the  statement  of the  fight  lasting  for  three  or  four  hours  being  absurd  ;  but  whether any  attempt  was  made  by  the  Chinese  to  kidnap  the  Andamanese,  or not,  and  whether  the  Andamanese  had  been  driven  by  ill-treatment  to thus  massacre  all  comers,  it  became  evident  that  such  a  state  of  things could  not  be  permitted.  Under  these  circumstances  the  Court  of Directors  ordered,  in  October  1856,  that  the  Andaman  Islands  should be  explored  and  reported  on  with  a  view  to  the  establishment  of  a Settlement  there.  This  exploration,  for  reasons  given,  was  not  under- taken until  the  end  of  1857.
In  1856  it  would  appear  that  the  only  information  which  the Government  of  India  possessed  regarding  the  Andamans  was  contained in  Lieutenant  Blair's,  Lieutenant  Colebrooke's,and  Major  Kyd's  reports, 1789-1796,  which  were  of  the  greatest  value ;  the  Chapter  above  quoted herein  from  Major  Michael  Symes'  "  Embassy  to  Ava,"  which,  except where  it  followed  Lieutenant  Blair  and  Lieutenant  Colebrooke,  is  of little  value  ;  Mr.  J.  B.  Quigley's  account  of  his  visit  to  Interview Island,  which  was  incorrect  and  dangerously  misleading  ;  and  some  few newspaper  articles,  and  brief  notices  in  Gazetteers  and  Cyclopaedias.
That  on  the  above  data  a  report  of  such  value  as  Captain  Hopkin- son's  could  have  been  written  is  astonishing.
Government  of  India.     Home  Department.     Public  Consultation. 6th  August  1858.
No.  77,  No.  4152,  dated  November  28th,  1855.
From  —  J.  W.  DALUTMPLEJ  Esq.,  Officiating  Secretary  to  the  Government
of  India, To  —  W.  GREY,  Esq.,  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  Bengal.
In  a  recent  Despatch,*  the  Hon'ble  the  Court  of  Directors, commenting  on  the  outrages  committed  by  the  in- habitants  of  the  Andaman  Islands  on  shipwrecked
paragraphs  4  and  5  in    seamen,  which  were  brought  to  notice  in  the  papers
the  Marine  Department.  .  r
received    w;th     Mr.     Under-Secretary     Young's
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
Memorandum,  dated  the  6th  July  1854,  observe  that  they  "  cannot doubt  that  the  subject  has  received  the  consideration  its  importance demands."
2.  The  attention  of  the  Hon'ble  the  President  in  Council  having thus  been  called  anew  to  the  subject,  I  am  directed  to  invite  the  sug- gestions  of  the  Hon'ble   the  Lieutenant-Governor  of  Bengal   as   to the  measures  he  would  propose  for  the  protection  of  such  British  sub- jects as  may  unfortunately  be  cast  away  on  the  Andamans.
3.  The  only  effectual  remedy    would    be  the   occupation  of  the Islands  in  question,  but  this  is  manifestly   impracticable.     However His  Honor  in  Council  believes  that  good  might  be  effected  by   the establishment  of  a  convict  Settlement  on  the  South- West  part  of  the Southern  Island,  which  is  reputed  to  be  healthy.
4.  It  will  be  in  the  Lieutenant-Governor's  recollection,   that   Port Cornwallis,  on  the  leeward  side  and  end  of  the  islands,  was  abandoned because  of  its  very  unhealthy  climate.
No.  78.  No.  96,  dated  February  39th,  1856.
From — W.  GREY,  Esq.,  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  Bengal,
To — The  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  India,  Foreign  Department.
I  am  directed  by  the  Lieutenant-Governor  of  Bengal  to  acknow- ledge the  receipt  of  Mr.  Officiating  Secretary  Dalrymple's  letter, No.  4152,  dated  the  28th  November  last,  regarding  the  outrages  com- mitted by  the  inhabitants  of  the  Andaman  Islands  on  shipwrecked seamen,  and  requesting  the  suggestions  of  the  Lieutenant-Governor as  to  the  measures  he  would  propose  for  the  protection  of  such  British subjects  as  may  unfortunately  be  cast  away  on  those  islands.
2.  In  reply,  I  am  now  directed  to  transmit  the  accompanying  copy of  a  letter  from  the  Commissioner  of  Arracan,   No.  18  of  the  8th instant,  which  appears  to  the  Lieutenant-Governor  to  embody  some very  valuable  suggestions  on  the  subject.
3.  It  is  obviously  Captain  Hopkinson's  opinion,  that  not  only  the
190  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
Andamans,  but  also  the  Mcobars,  should  be  occupied  and  brought under  our  Government.  He  would  do  this  gradually,  using  the  estab- lishment of  a  penal  colony  on  the  west  or  south-west  side,  as  a  first step  to  a  complete  occupation.
4.  In  this  opinion,  the  Lieutenant-Governor,  I  am  directed  to  say, entirely  concurs  ;  for  the  purpose  which  is  mainly  in  view  in  the  re- agitation  of  this  question,  the  mere  establishment  of  a  penal  colony at  one  extremity  of  one  island  would  be  inadequate,  nor  would  any- thing short  of  entire  domination  prevent  the  evils  which  now  occur from  the  savage  and  unbridled  ferocity  of  the  present  inhabitants.  On the  other  hand,  there  is  good  reason  to  suppose  that  the  occupation  of these  islands  would  bring  many  positive  advantages,  while  their  sup- posed unhealthiness  would  probably  not  be  found  more  lasting  than that  of  the  coast  and  islands  of  Arraean.
No.  18,  dated  Kyouk  Phyoo,  February  8th,  1856.
From  —  Captain  HENBY  HOPKINSON,  Commissioner  of  Arracan, To  —  W.  GBEY,  Esq.,  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  Bengal.
»  NO   4152,   dated          I  have  the  honor  to  acknowledge   the  receipt
Fort  Willhm,   Novera-         e  •,    ,,  j  •.  -.-,-       .._      ,,  .,
ber,  1855  fr,,m  Official-     of  your  letter  to  my  address,  No.  541  of  the  18th
to"the     December,  1855,   with  its  enclosures,*  requesting Government  of  Bengal,    that  I  would  report  on  the  measures  I  would   pro-
Note  on    Tort  Corn-
waiiis  on  the  Great  An-    pose  f  or  the  protection  of  such  British  subjects
dauians  by  R.   C.   TuU  ,.  ,    •.      •.
loh,  Esq.  as  may  untortunately  be  cast  away  on  the  Anda-
mans.
2.  I  have  given  the  question  much  consideration,  but  I  do  not  see how  it  is  possible  to  reply  to  it  otherwise  than  as  expressed  by  Mr. Secretary  Dalrymple,  that  the  only  effectual  remedy  would  be  the occupation  of  the  islands,  and  if  this  should  appear  impracticable, then  I  must  still  agree  that  the  establishment  of  a  British  settlement on  one  of  the  islands,  which  might  extend  itself  hereafter  as  circum- stances allowed,  would  be  the  next  best  thing.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
191
3.  The  relation  in  which  the  Andamans   shall  henceforth   stand with  reference  to  our  commerce  in  the  Bay  of  Bengal,  to  our  commer- cial settlements  on  its  coasts,  and  especially  to  those  on  the  eastern  side, whether  we  are  to  renounce  all  connection  with  these  islands  or  whether they  shall  be  included  in  our  system,  form  a  subject  which  I  certainly do  think  deserves  most  earnest  attention.
4.  Looking  on  the  map   at  the  magnificent  situation  of  these islands,  their  proximity  to  such  seats  of  trade  as  Madras,  Calcutta, Akyab,   Rangoon,   Moulmein,  Penang,  and  Singapore,   considering their  extent,  which  must  comprise  an   area  of  not  much  under  two thousand  square  miles,  their  many   fine  harbours,  and  the  prospect, reasoning  from  analogy,  of  the  abundant  fertility  of  their  soil,  it  does seem  astonishing  that  their  condition  on  the  present  day  should  be such  as  to  make  us  wish  that  they  could  be  blotted  from  the  face  of the  ocean  or  sunk  a  thousand  fathoms  deep  below  its  surface.     That instead  of  offering  a  refuge  to  the  miserable  storm-driven  vessel,   they should  be  a  snare  in  her  path  leading  to  utter  destruction,  and  in   place of  engaging  the  enterprise,  and  furnishing  subsistence  to  thousands  of
industrious  colonists,  they  should  be  left  Jn  the  pos-
*  I  believe,  thongb,  .
that  rats  and  pigs  are  session  oi  a  handful  or  degenerate  negroes,  degraded ^iytohebe°nfoundaon  in  habits  and  intelligence  to  a  level  little  above  the the  islands.  beasta  of  ttle  forest*  wjth  which  they  dwell.
6.  A  scarcely  more  hopeful  acquisition  could  a  large  portion  of Arracan  have  appeared  some  thirty  years  ago,  than  the  Andamans now.  In  climate  and  natural  features  the  two  countries  are  likely  to have  much  in  common,  and  the  change  which,  within  my  memory has  been  effected  in  the  former,  may*perhaps  warp  my  judgment  in supposing  that  the  task  of  reclaiming  the  latter  may  not  be  altogether so  impracticable  as  is  believed.  Further,  though  a  matter  beyond  my province  to  discuss,  I  may  surmise  that  the  reasons,  which  towards  the close  of  1788,  led  the  Board  of  Administration  to  seek  a  harbour  suffi- ciently capacious  to  afford  shelter  to  a  fleet,  have  rather  gained  than lost  in  force  in  1856.  We  have  much  more  to  protect  now  than  we bad  then,  and  without  pretending  to  speculate  on  the  march  of  events, I  may  imagine  the  case  of  our  having  deep  cause  to  rue  that  we  had
192
A  HISIORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
left  it  to  any  power  but  our  own  to  find  a  capacious  harbour  for  a  fleet at  the  Andamans.
6.  However,  it  matters   not  whether  we  can  find  in  any  considera- tions of  domestic  or  foreign  policy,  arguments  weighty  enough  to  recon- cile us  to  the  occupation  of  these  islands,  or  a  portion  of   them ;  for  if the  protection  of  the  unfortunate  seamen  who  may  be  cast  away  on their  inhospitable  shores  cannot  be  otherwise  assured,  it  is  inevitable the   question  is   no  longer  one  of  expediency,  but,  belonging  to   the first  duty  of  a  Government,   should  be  performed  at  even  a  great sacrifice.     Let  us  suppose  that  on  the  line  of  one  of  our  great  trunk roads  there  intervened  a  tract  in  the  condition  of  the  Andamans, should  we  hesitate  at  any  cost  to  make  it  safe  ?    And  is  not  the  obli- gation equal,  to  provide  for  the  security  of  our  ocean  highways  ?  I  do not  see  either  that  wo  can  limit  our  concern  to  British  subjects.     We maintain  the  right  of  possession  to  the  islands,  and  other  nations  may tell  us  in  the  phrase  of  the  day,  that  this  property  has  its  duties   as •well  as  its  rights,  and  demand  that  we  abate  such  a  nuisance  to   the rest  of  world.
7.  If  it  be  conceded  then   that  some   partial  occupation  of  the Andamans  for  protective  purposes  should  be  attempted,  only  its  nature and  locality  remain  to  be  considered  ;  for  the  first,  I  can   imagine   no better  plan  than  that  of  ;vhich  the  idea  is  suggested  by  His  Honor  in Council ;  I  would  found  a  Penal  Settlement,  but  so  constituted  that  it might  form  a  nucleus  for  a  colony  or  that   a   colony   might    grow  up side  by  side  with  it,  into  which  it  would  hereafter  merge.     It  appears to  me  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  lay  the  foundation  of  a  permanent Settlement  in  any  other  way,  than  by  the  establishment  of  a  convict dep6t  in  the  first  instance.     It  would  be  the  cheapest  plan,  as  of  labour which  would  otherwise  be  the  chief  source  of  expense,  if,  indeed,  it  could be  procured  at  all  on  any  terms  however  exorbitant,  we  should  have abundance,  at  the  cost  of  maintaining  a  body  of  men  who  have  to  be guarded  and  maintained  under  all  circumstances.     The  system  pursued in  the  management  of  English  Penal  Colonies  would  probably  be  con- sulted with  advantage  in  many  respects,  but  it   would   be   premature now  to  enter  into  any  questions  of  organization  or  detail,  and  I  shall
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
193
make  but  very  few  remarks  on  what  occur  to  me  as  some  of  the  more salient  points.     The  prisoners  at  first  would  have   to  be  employed  in making  the  station,  with  its  roads,  barracks,  public  buildings,  and  jail, and  when  completed,  those  who  had  not  forfeited  the  privilege  by  mis- conduct, would  receive  tickets  of  leave,  and  be  allowed   to  labour  for their  own  profit  only.     Natives  of  Arracan,  Pegu,  or  Burma,  and  the Tenasserim  Provinces,  convicted  of  any  crime  for  which  any  less  term  of imprisonment  than,  say,  seven  years  (or  even  a  lesser  term  may  be  fixed) would  be  deemed  an  inadequate  punishment,  should  invariably  be transported  to  the  Andamans,  and  their  wives  might  be  encouraged  to follow,  by  giving  the  husbands  of  those  who  came,  tickets  of  leave  at  the earliest  period.     The  Burmese  would  find  in  the  Andamans  a  climate and  a  country  quite  congenial  to  them,  and  although  so  sparse  a  popu- lation, I  believe  they  would  have  founded  a  colony  there  by  this  time, had  they  been  left  to  themselves.     They  frequently  visited  the  islands, and  I  suspect  a  good  deal  of  the  hostility  of  the  Natives  to   foreigners may  be  laid  to  their  account,  as  I  have  heard  that  they  used   to  cap- ture them  to  carry  into  slavery.     I  do  not  of  course  mean  that  only Burmese  convicts  should  go  to  the  Settlement,  but   the  more  of   this race  there  were,  the  better.     Military  guards  might  be  furnished  from the  regiments  stationed  at  Rangoon  and  Moulmein.     The  Settlement would  not  be  more  than  a  couple  of  days'  run  from  Moulmein  for   the coast  steamer,  and  the  guards  might  be  relieved  therefore  readily  and easily  as  often  as  was  necessary.     The  Superintendent  would  also  require a  small  sea-going  steamer  at  his  disposal,   and  a   couple  of   schooner packets  of  a  burden  of,  say,  50  or  60  tons.     The  establishment  of  the Settlement  should  not  be  commenced  with  earlier  than  in  November or  later  than  December.
8.  I  now  proceed  to  consider  in  what  part  of  the  Andamans  the new  Settlement  should  be  located.  But  in  the  first  place,  it  seems worth  while  to  examine  on  what  grounds  their  extreme  insalubrity generally  has  been  assumed :  they  may  be  insalubrious,  the  climate may  be,  as  I  have  seen  it  called,  a  most  merciless  one,  but  what proofs  have  we  of  the  fact  ?  Properly  applied,  it  does  not  appear  to me  that  the  experience  gained  in  the  expedition  under  Lieutenant
2o
194  A  HISTORY  OF  OUK  RELATIONS
Blair  and  Captain  Kyd  warrants  any  such  conclusion,  and  we  have none  other  to  guide  us.  Their  occupation  appears  to  have  lasted for  about  six  years  and  a  half,  or  from  Octoher  or  November,  1789, to  the  middle  of  1796,  and  for  the  first  four  years  I  learn  from  Mr. Tulloh's  most  interesting  precis  that  in  all  Lieutenant  Blair's  reports he  made  favourable  mention  of  the  climate;  it  was  not  until  the  close of  1793  that  the  sickness,  which  led  to  the  Settlement  being  aban- doned, made  its  appearance.  Thus,  there  were  four  years  of  health,  and two  and  a  half  of  sickness,  and  the  balance  is  in  favour  of  the climate.  Moreover  it  seems  that  as  long  as  the  settlers  were  at  Old Port  Cornwallis  they  kept  well ;  and  that  it  was  not  until  they were  removed  in  the  fourth  year  to  New  Port  Cornwallis,  that  they fell  sick.  I  should  not  draw  the  conclusion  from  this  that  the islands  generally  were  very  unhealthy,  hut  simply  that  the  choice made  of  New  Port  Cornwallis  was  a  bad  one.  Now  it  is  not  very  easy to  determine  beforehand  how  a  place  will  turn  out.  Much  more  is guessed  at  than  is  known  concerning  malaria,  but  with  this  reserva- tion I  must  say  that  the  unhealthiness  of  New  Port  Cornwallis  is  but what  I  should  have  expected  from  its  position,  to  which  the  South- West  monsoon  would  bring,  as  it  came  sweeping  up  their  entire  length, the  accumulated  miasma  from  every  part  of  the  island  group.  The settlers  were  so  placed,  in  fact,  as  to  receive  the  full  benefit  of  what- ever there  was  noxious  in  the  air.  With  a  similar  position,  the  same thing  happens  at  this  station,  (Kyouk  Phyoo),  the  south-west  travel- ling up  Ramree  Island,  makes  it  during  the  rains  exceedingly  un- healthy ;  while  at  Akyab  the  rainy  season,  when  the  wind  blows directly  on  the  town  from  the  sea,  is,  I  think,  the  healthiest  period  of the  year.
However,  I  must  say,  I  am  much  more  astonished  that  the  set- tlers should  have  been  so  well  in  their  first  location,  than  that  they hould  have  suffered  so  much  in  their  second.  One  might  almost suspect  that  Lieutenant  Blair's  representations  were  favourable  on this  point,  but  if  the  fact  were  so,  it  proves  a  good  deal  for  the  Anda- mans  that  the  first  spot  selected  should  have  been  found  so  salubrious, and  that  at  starting,  and  in  the  first  years,  which  are  always  the  most
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
fatal.     But  beyond  this,  the  sickness  afterwards  experienced  at  the second  station,  even  if  the  special  cause  I  have  found   for   it   be  set aside,  would  not,  I  believe,  prevent  the   climate  from  being    favour- ably contrasted  with  that  of  any  part  of  the  adjoining  coast.  "Remit- tent fever  and  enlargement  of  the  spleen,"  writes  Captain  Kyd,  "were the  principal   complaints  with  which  settlers  were  attacked,"  and  the ravages  were  so  great  that  the  Surgeon   of   the  Settlement  reported that  "  one-fourth  of  the  people  on  the  island  were  totally  unfit  for  any kind  of  duty."     Now  I  will  undertake  to  affirm  that  Captain  Kyd would  have  had  to  deplore  far  more  frightful  ravages,   had   his  little colony  been  established  under  similar  circumstances,  and  at  that  time, in  any  part  of  Arracan,  Pegu,  or  Tenasserim.     Considering  how  little hygiene  had  been  studied  in  those  days,  and  that  the  nature  of  remit- tent fever,   which   commonly  attends   the  clearing  of  lands  for  new settlements  in  all  inter-tropical  regions,  was  scarcely  understood,  that its  attacks  must   have  been  constantly   provoked  and  then  invited anew  by   the  mode  of  treatment    employed    to  repel   them,  that quinine  had  not  been  then  discovered,  I   am  surprised  that   no   more than  one-fourth  were  sick.     What  was  the  state  of  the  case  30  years later  at  Rangoon,  Arracan  Town,  and  at  the  Island  of   Cheduba, beyond  contradiction  now  the  healthiest  part  of  Arracan,  but  where our  soldiers  died  en  masse  on  first  landing  ;  and  even  now   what  has been  the  case  with  most  of  the  new  stations  established  in   Pegu  ?   A proportion  of  sick  often  greater  than  that  reported  by   Captain   Kyd. No,   I  do  not  suppose  that  in  the  Andamans  we  shall  find  a  Mont- pellier,  but,  should  they  ever  be  occupied,  I   do  think   they  will  be discovered  to  possess   generally,  a  climate  superior  to  that  of  most of  our  settlements  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Bay.
9.  From  the  remarks  I  have  made  as  regards  New  Port   Cornwal- lis,  it  will  be  understood  that  in  the  event  of  a  fresh  attempt  to   form a  Settlement  being  made,  I  should  prefer  a  return  to  Chatham  Island, or  else  to  move  to  the  western  side   of  the   group,  and  I   should think  that  at  Interview  Island,  or  Port  Andaman,  the  first  port  made by  Lieutenant  Blair,  a  suitable  position  would  be  found.
10.  If  I  am  right  in  my  conjecture  that  most  of  the  wrecks  on  the
2c2
196
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
Andamans  occur  during  the  sou tli-west  monsoon,  when  the  west  coast is  the  lee-shore,  the  fact  would  be  an  additional  argument  for  having the  settlement  on  the  western  side.  Away  off  at  New  Port  Corn- wallis,  it  could  render  very  little  assistance  or  protection.
11.  I  would  not  recommend  the  re-occupation  of  these  islands for  their  own  sake ;  but  I  am  very  far  from  thinking  that  we  should find  nothing  in  them  which  would  in  part  compensate  for  our  having undertaken  it.     The  abundance  of  fine  timber  proves  the  capability  of the  soil  to  yield   the  richest  agricultural  produce.    The  cocoa-nut would  no  doubt  flourish.     The  low  lands  would  furnish   heavy   crops of  rice.     On   more  elevated   tracts,  the  nutmeg  might  be  cultivated with  advantage  :  it  grows  well  on  the  islands  lying  off  Mergui,  which is  in  the  same  latitude  as  Port  Andaman,  and  if  it  were  found  to   suc- ceed, Chinese  settlers   would   soon   flock  in  to  engage  in  its  culture. Fibrous  materials  are  also  likely  to  be  procurable  in  large   quantities, and  the  timber  must  be  well  worth  attention,  if,  as  Lieutenant   Blair asserts,  it  is   fit  for  ship-building.     Fisheries  would  also  be  found remunerative.
12.  Any  project  for  the  re-occupation   of  the   Andamans  should also  comprehend  arrangement  for  exercising  from  them  a  surveillance over  the  neighbouring   group   of  the  Nicobars.     Those  islands  have acquired  a  horrid  notoriety  of  late  years  for  the  murderous  piracies committed  by  their  inhabitants.     An  interesting  article  on  the  sub- ject appeared  in  the  columns  of  the  Englishman   newspaper,  under date  the  4th  of  January  of  this  year ;  the  writer,   however,  gives  no later  instance  than  1848  ;  but  it  will  be  within  the  memory  of  Govern- ment, that   on  information  submitted  to  it  in   1852,   Captain  Dicey, of  the  steamer  Tenasserim,  was  despatched  to  the  Nicobars,  and  that his  report  left  no  doubt  that  two  vessels,  one  of  them   English,  had been   recently   destroyed  and  their  crews  murdered  by  the  natives. This,  if  I  remember  right,  was  at  Kar  Morta,  and  one  of  the  victims was  an  English  woman,   who,   with  her  children,  was  put  to  death under  circumstances  of  the  most  shocking   atrocity.     It  would  be well  if  these  islands  could  be  reduced  to   our  authority,   and,   if   the establishment  of  a   Penal   Settlement  were  the  only  consideration,
WITH  THE  ANDAMANKSE.
they  would  probably  answer  as  well  for  that  purpose  as  the  And  i- mans.
No.  83.  No.  49,  dated  April  22nd,  1856.
From — The  Bight  Hon'ble  Viscount  CANNING,  His  Excellency  General G.  ANSON,  the  Hon'ble  J.  DORIN,  Major  General  J.  Low,  and the  Hon'ble  B.  PEACOCK,
To — The  Hon'ble  the  Court  of  Directors  of  the  East  India  Company. In  continuation  of  our  letter  No.  39,  dated   the   8th   instant,  we
*  ,«  ,  j  ,n  ^  ,T    u       have    the   honor    to   transmit    for  your    Hon'ble
*  Dated  19th  March.
Court  s  information,  a  copy  of  a  letter*  from  the Commissioner  of  the  Tenasserim  and  Martaban  Provinces,  reporting the  murder,  by  the  inhabitants  of  one  of  the  Andaman  Islands,  o  f eight  Chinese  traders.
No.  80.  No.  118,  dated  Moulmein,  March  19th,  1856.
From — Colonel  Sir  A.    BOGLE,  Kt.,  Commissioner  of  the  Tenasserim  and Martaban  Provinces,
To — G.  F.  EDMONDSTONE,  Esq.,  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  India. I  have  the  honor  to  submit,  for  the  information  of  the  Government, copy  of  a  letter,  as  per  margin,  from  the  Magistrate iiSb,  I856dated  3rd    at  Moulmein,  together  with  copies  of  the  deposi- tions to  which  it  refers,  concerning  the  murder,  by the  inhabitants  of  one  of  the  Andaman  Islands,   of  eight  Chinese traders.
2.  It  is  no  doubt  exceedingly  to  be  regretted  that  the  inhabitants of  the  Andamans  never  lose  an  opportunity  of  murdering  all  who may  fall  within  their  power ;  but  a  circumstance  so  well  known  and of  so  grievous  a  character  must,  long  ere  this,  have  frequently occupied  the  attention  of  the  Supreme  Government.
A  HISTORY  OF  OUtt  RELATIONS
3.  I,  therefore,  confine  myself  to  simply  submitting  these  docu- ments in  further  illustration  of  the  danger  of  landing  on  the  Andaman Islands,  and  of  the  inhospitable  and  savage  character  of  the natives.
No.  62,  dated  Moulmein,  March  3rd,  1S56. From — J.  C.  HAOGHTON,  Esq.,  Magistrate,
To — Colonel   Sir   A.    BOGLE,    Kt.,  Commissioner  of  the  Tenasserim  and Martaban  Provinces.
I  have  the  honor  to  forward,  herewith,  copies  of  the  depositions of  the  Master  and  two  of  the  crew  of  the  Junk  Fuen  Gren,  of this  port.
1st. — From  their  statement  it  would  appear  that  having  adopted an  erroneous  course  from  Junk  Ceylon  on  their  voyage  from  Penang to  the  Nicobars,  they  fell  in  with  the  Andaman  Group,  and  eight  of their  number  landing  on  one  of  the  islands  to  obtain  water,  were  mas- sacred.
2nd. — With  people  so  intensely  ignorant  of  navigation  in  com- mand, it  is  no  wonder  that  the  vessel  went  out  of  its  course,  and  it may  be  difficult  to  ascertain  on  which  particular  island  the  men •were  murdered :  possibly  the  accompanying  rough  sketch,  copied from  one  drawn  by  the  master,  may  tend  to  solve  the  question.
Srd.— I  trust  you  will  represent  this  case  to  the  Government. It  is  impossible  to  say  how  many  lives  may  be  lost  in  this  way yearly,  and  to  me,  I  confess,  it  appears  highly  discreditable  in  a civilised  Government  to  allow  such  a  state  of  things  to  exist  within a  sea,  one  may  say,  bounded  by  its  own  territories  and  on  the  high road  to  many  of  its  chief  emporia.
4th. — It  must  be  recollected  too  that  since  the  war,  Rangoon  and Bassein  have  become  British  ports,  and  the  commerce  of  both  greatly increased.
6th.— I  may  remind  you  also  that  during  the  past  year,  three British  vessels  have  been  cast  away  on,  or  in  the  immediate  neigh- bourhood of,  the  Andaman  Islands.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESB.
Deposition  of  Ali  Meu,  Chinese,  son  of  Ah  Saing,  aged  20  years, native  of  Surveng  in  China,  by  profession  a  ship -master,  now  of  the town  of  Moulmein ;  before  J.  C.  Haughton,  Esq.,  this  27th  day  of February,  1856.
Deponent  duly  sworn,  sayeth : —
"  I  sailed  from  Ponang  bound  to  the  Nicobar  Islands,  on  the  26th  of the   Chinese  month  Sevengists,   in  the   Chinese  Junk   Puen   Gren, of  which   I  am  the   Master.     We  were   bound  to  Nicobars  to  load cocoa-nuts.    "We  made  an  island  on  which  were  two  mountains,  nine days   after   our   departure;    this   we  decided  was  not  our  destination, so  we  steered   on   N.-N.-W.   and   came   to  another   island   five   days after;    we  had  been  detained  by  adverse  wind.     This  island  was  one of  the  Huckmesau  ("  The   Negro  Mountains  ")   or  Andaman  Islands; coasting,  we  saw  some  five  or  six  men  on  the   shore,   and  being  short of  water,   concluded  that  it  must  be  obtainable  where  men  were  ;  we therefore  let  down  our  boat  and   sent   it   on    shore   with   eight   men. When  the   people   on  the  shore  saw   our   men  coming  to  the  shore, they  fled  to  their  mountain.     Our  men  landed,  and  leaving  six   men with   the   boat  on   the   beach,   the  remaining  two  went  in  search  of water.     Immediately  we  saw  our  two  men  fleeing   back,  followed    by twenty  or  so  of  the  natives,  who  began  to  attack  our  men  ;  the latter  struggled  to  get  off  the   boat  from  the  beach  on  which  they had  hauled  it  up,  but  they  could  not  do  so.    We  saw  them  kill  all our  men  and  drag  them  in  the  jungle.    They  also  broke  up  the  boat. As  we  were  only  five  men  remaining  in  the  Junk,  and  had  no  remaining boat,   we  could  do  nothing ;    we  hastily  weighed  anchor  and  stood out  to  sea.    The  attack  was  made  on   our  men  at   8   o'clock  in  the morning ;    we   saw   all  that  was  done  plainly,  as  we  were  not  further from  the  shore  than  the  Police  Office  is  from  the   Main   Wharf    (400 yards).     Nineteen  days  after  we  made  the  land,  about  Coopa,  south of  Mergui,  where  the  lead  mines  are  ;  we  then  coasted  along  to  this place.     It  is  twenty-four  days  since  we  made  the  land  below  Mergui. We  made  land  two  days  before  the  Chinese   New  Year's   Day.     We did  not  land  anywhere,   as  the  mate  was  very  ignorant  of  the  coast, and  we  had  lost  our  boat.    We  were  on  short  allowance  of  water  all
200  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
the  time,  a  small  pot  of  water  among  five  of  us.  We  had  only  two casks  of  water  when  we  left  the  Andamans,  and  had  about  half  a cask  left  when  we  got  to  Amherst.  I  am  quite  certain  that  our men  did  not  interfere  with  the  natives.  They  had  two  dahs  and some  bamboos,  but  no  other  weapons.  Our  men  raised  their  oars  to defend  themselves  at  first,  but  seeing  themselves  out-numbered,  they fled  and  tried  to  get  off  their  boat.  They  seemed  to  be  very  tall,  as compared  to  our  men.  Looking  at  them  with  the  telescope,  they appeared  to  have  merely  leaves  round  their  waist.  We  could  not discern  what  arms  they  had.  I  would  recognize  the  place  if  I  saw it  again.  The  Burmese  Malim  can  show  the  place.  He  said  he  knew the  course  to  the  Nicobars.  He  went  with  us  from  this  place.  His name  is  Moung  Poon ;  he  lives  in  Mayangong.  We  did  not  know the  land ;  the  Malim  and  the  writer,  when  we  got  well  off  the  shore, recognized  that  the  island  was  not  of  the  Nicobars.  I  never  heard before  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Andamans."
Deposition  of  Ahyon,  son  of  Saing  Ton,  aged  33  years,  native  of Suneng,  iu  China,  by  profession  a  seaman,  now  of  the  town  of Moulmein ;  before  J.  C.  Haughton,  Esq.,  Magistrate,  this  28th  day of  February,  1856.
Deponent  duly  sworn,  sayeth:  —
"  We  sailed  from  Penang  on  26th  of  the  llth  Chinese  month  last year,  bound  to  Yasan,  (Cocoa-nut  Island  or  Nicobar),  with  the  wind E.-N.-E.  We  steered  N.-W.  till  we  came  to  nine  small  islands  called Saw-chee-ling ;  there  we  stood  S.-S.-W.  nearly  four  days  and  three nights,  after  we  made  a  long  low  island.  We  made  the  land  early in  the  morning.  We  steered  about  N.-N.-W.  We  then  made another  island  at  4  in  the  evening.  It  was  not  very  high,  we  stood  on all  night  keeping  three  small  islands  on  the  right  hand  and  the  island
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  201
just  mentioned  on  our  left,  steering  North  (witness  corrects  him- self), the  bigger  island  was  on  the  right  hand;  we  passed  between; the  long  island  was  the  southernmost ;  we  met  one  day  and  one  night after  an  island  on  our  left  side  with  a  grassy  plain  on  the  north  side and  a  hill  on  the  south.  We  went  on  one  day,  having  an  island  with high  mountains  in  it  on  our  right  hand  side.  We  thought  we  were going  to  the  Kicobars  all  this  time.  Our  Burmese  mate  suggested we  should  get  water ;  we  anchored  therefore  at  daylight.  The  mate told  us  to  go  and  get  water ;  we  objected  that  there  were  two  casks on  board,  and  that  we  did  not  know  where  we  were ;  however,  we  put four  big  and  five  small  buckets  and  some  tubs  into  the  boat,  also some  handspikes  and  rattans  to  carry  them  with.  The  boat  went  on shore  with  eight  men,  including  Mali  Neng,  a  part  owner  and  writer of  the  junk.  When  the  boat  touched  the  ground,  it  was  at  once thrown  upon  the  beach  by  the  waves.  They  sent  two  men  to  look for  the  water,  and  shortly  after  we  saw  them  running  and  two  men after  them ;  the  kaffirs  cried  out,  then  twenty  or  thirty  men  followed them  and  attacked  our  men  and  killed  them,  destroying  also  the  boat. They  remained  in  a  circle  round  them  a  long  time.  We  could  not see  what  they  did.  At  4  we  weighed  anchor  and  stood  North,  and when  the  wind  changed  to  North  we  stood  East.  In  seven  days  we saw  the  mountain  we  had  left.  We  returned  back  through  the islands  the  way  we  had  come,  seeking  a  passage  to  get  out  of  the islands ;  we  then,  not  finding  our  way,  returned  back  in  three  days to  the  place  where  our  men  were  killed.  We  went  North  of  that island  and  steered  East  between  those  two  islands,  and  in  ten  days came  to  Chow  Cheling  again.  We  had  the  N.-E.  and  steered  for Moulmein.  We  did  not  go  into  Mergui,  as  there  were  many  sand- banks and  we  had  no  boat.  The  people  who  killed  our  men  were black  as  ink.  We  had  no  weapon.  One  of  our  men  had  two  dahs (described  case  knives  about  a  cubit  long) ;  none  else  had  any weapon.  None  of  the  kaffirs  were  killed.  The  kaffirs  continued round  our  men  till  they  left.  We  saw  our  people  all  fallen.  They fought  for  three  or  four  hours  with  handspikes  and  oars,  but  the kaffirs  got  these  from  them  at  last."
3D
202  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
Deposition  of  Moung  Bwin,  son  of  Moung  Boke,  aged  46  years, native  of  Tavoy,  by  profession  a  seaman,  now  of  the  town  of  Moul- mein ;  before  J.  C.  Haughton,  Esq.,  Magistrate,  this  28th  day  of February,  1856.
Deponent  duly  sworn,  sayeth —
"  I  embarked  at  this  port  as  steersman  on  board  a  Chinese  Junk
now  lying  in  the  river,  about  five  months  ago,  bound   to   Bassein   and
Penang.     We  arrived  at  Penang  in  due  course.     We  left  that  port
I  think  about  one  month  ago,  with  a  crew  of  twelve  persons,  who
being  all   Chinese,  except  myself,   I  do  not  know  their  names.     We
were  bound  to  the  Nicobars  for  cocoa-nuts,  and  thence  to   Bassein.
We  made  land  in  eight   days,  a  flat  island.     I  told  the  crew  it  was
not  of  the  Nicobars,   we  sailed  round  it.    At  Penang  I   told   my
employers  that  I  had  never  been  from  Penang  to  Nicobars,  and  did
not  know  the  course.     I  was  directed,  however,  by  a   Chinese,   and
under  the  instructions  received,  I  sailed  North.     Three  days  after  we
left  the  flat  island,   we  saw  a  high  island,  and  we  thought  it  was
one  of  the  Nicobars  ;    as  we  got  close  we  saw  it  was  not.     In  the
morning,  the  Chinese  performed  worship  and  said,  as  they  had  very
little  water,  they  would  go  on  shore.     We  were  at  anchor  and  getting
under  weigh,  stood  in  and  cast  anchor  as  far  off  the  shore  as  the  main.
street  is  from  the   Police  Office.     After  anchoring,  seven  men  got  into
the  boat  and  went  on  shore ;  we  had  seen  some  persons  on  the  shore.
These,  as  they  saw  our  boat  coming,  went  into  the  jungle.     Two  of  our
men  went  in  search  of  water,  the  rest  remained  by  the  boat.     In  a  very
short  time  a  number  of  people  came  out  of  the  jungle,  about  thirty  men ;
our  two  men  ran  for  their  boat.    They  chased  them  and  overtook  them
at  the  boat ;  a  fight  ensued  between  both  parties ;  the  kaffirs  killed  all
the  Chinese  and  broke  the  boat  to  pieces  with  their  hands.     The  kaffirs
had  bows  in  their  hands;    they   also  pelted  them  with  stones.     Our
men  landed  at  about  9   o'clock ;  they  could  not  get  their  boat  off,
though  they  tried.     The  fight  lasted  about  three  hours ;  by   this  time
our  men  were  all  killed.    About  four  hours  after  (having  waited
that  time  to  see  if  our  men  were  really  dead),  we  got  underweigh,
and  stood  to  the  Northward,  intending  to  go  to  Bassein  or  Arracan.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  203
The  wind  being  foul,  at  the  end  of  five  days  we  stood  East  and  after twelve  days  we  made  Selimore  (Junk  Ceylon),  the  place  whence  we had  taken  our  departure  for  the  Nicobars,  and  by  the  direction  of the  captain  we  stood  for  Moulmein.  The  wind  was  North-east when  we  first  departed.  From  Selimore  we  intended  to  put  into Tavoy,  but  thought  it  would  be  very  hard  to  get  in,  as  we  had  no  boat ; we  therefore  stood  on  to  this  place.  I  cannot  say  how  many  days elapsed  from  the  time  we  took  our  departure  from  Selimore  till  we got  to  Moulmein ;  no  one  kept  any  reckoning.  I  cannot  be  sure  that the  islands  we  made  were  the  kaffirs'  island  (Andamans).  I  think so,  as  there  is  no  other  nation  that  kill  people  without  reason.  We steered  N.-W.  from  Selimore  to  go  to  Nicobars.  The  point  we  took our  departure  for  is  a  high  cape  projecting  into  the  sea.  The  island on  which  our  crew  were  killed  was  about  two  days  sail  in  length, and  very  high  and  mountainous.  We  did  not  see  any  island  to  the north  of  it.  We  stood  off  shore.  We  had  seen  three  small  islands, and  one  a  little  longer  to  the  south  of  it ;  the  latter  had  a  hill,  but not  very  high.  With  a  fair  wind  it  would  have  taken  about  ten hours  to  sail  along  it.
"  The  Chinese  did  not  provoke  the  kaffirs  in  any  way.  The  affair took  place  just  as  I  have  stated.  The  Chinese  had  handspikes  of  the windlass  with  them  to  carry  water,  but  no  arms.  They  had  no  arms in  the  junk  whatever.  There  five  or  six  vessels  for  water  in  the boat".
No.  82.  No.  39,  dated  April  8th,  1856.
From — The  Right  Hon'ble  Viscount  Canning,  His  Excellency  General G.  Anson,  the  Hon'ble  J.  Dorin,  Major-General  J.  Low,  aud the  Hon'ble  B.  Peacock,
To — The  Hon'ble  the  Court  of  Directors  of  the  East  India  Company.
With  reference  to  paragraphs  4  and  5  of  your  Hon'ble  Court's Despatch  in  the  Marine  Department,  No.  47,  dated  29th  August,  1855, we  have  the  honour  to  transmit  a  copy  of  a  correspondence  with  the Government  of  Bengal,  and  of  the  Minutes  noted  on  the  margin, respecting  the  expediency  of  forming  a  Settlement  on  the  Andaman Islands.
2c  2
204
A  HISTORY  OF  OTTR  RELATIONS
2.  It   will  be  observed   that  both,  tlie  Commissioner  of  Arracan and  the  Lieutenant-Governor   of   Bengal   advocate   such  an  occupa- tion commencing  with  a  Penal  Settlement.
3.  For  our  grounds  of  objection  to  the  proposed   measure,    we refer  your  Hon'ble  Court  to  the   Minute  recorded  by   the  Governor- General.
(The  Minutes  are  not  published.)
POLITICAL  DEPARTMENT.
No.  84.
No.  37  of  1856. Our  Governor-General  of  India  in  Council.
1. — We  have  taken  into  consideration  the  circumstances  brought to  our  notice  in  your  letters  in  the  Foreign  Department,  dated  the Sth  and  22nd  of  April,  Nos.  39  and  49  of  1856,  and  the  opinions  of the  several  members  of  your  Government,  relative  to  the  expediency  of forming  a  Settlement  in  the  Andaman  Islands  in  the  Bay  of  Bengal.
2nd. — Formal  possession  of  these  islands  was  taken  by  the  British Government  in  the  year  1789.  From  that  time  to  the  year  1796  they were  occupied  by  British  subjects,  but  there  was  then,  according to  the  Governor- General,  a  "deliberate  abandonment"  of  them,  on  ac- count, as  the  Commissioner  of  Arracan  observes,  of  their  "  extreme insalubrity,"  and  it  does  not  appear  that,  during  the  last  sixty  years, we  have  had  any  other  than  nominal  possession  of  the  islands.  We do  not  conceive,  however,  that  although  we  have  suffered  our  rights to  remain  thus  long  in  abeyance,  there  is  any  impediment  to  our re-assertion  of  them,  whenever  it  may  be  convenient  to  us  to  adopt such  a  course.
3rd. — It  is  always  possible  that  circumstances  may  compel  us  to re-assert  these  rights.  It  would  have  been  highly  inconvenient  and objectionable,  at  any  time,  that  a  group  of  islands,  so  situated« should  be  occupied  by  strangers,  but  the  importance  of  the  considera-
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  205
tion  has  been  much  increased,  since  we  have  become  masters  of  Pegu. The  Bay  of  Bengal  is  now,  as  observed  by  Mr.  Grant,  a  British  sea, and  it  is  more  than  ever  incumbent  on  us  to  prevent  persons,  not subject  to  the  British  Government,  from  settling  within  its  limits.
4th. — That  many  vessels  have  been  wrecked  on  the  Andaman Islands,  and  many  shipwrecked  mariners  destroyed  by  the  savage inhabitants,  are  facts  of  notoriety,  and,  to  some  extent,  of  official record.  We  do  not  doubt,  therefore,  that  a  harbour  or  harbours  of refuge  at  a  convenient  part  of  one  or  more  of  these  islands  would conduce  to  the  security  of  traffic,  and  to  the  general  interests  of humanity.
5th. — Whether  or  not  it  would  be  desirable  to  establish  a  Penal Settlement  on  the  Andaman  Islands,  is  a  question  dependent  upon considerations,  which  it  is  not  necessary  to  bring  into  view  at  the present  moment.
6th. — Before,  however,  we  decide  upon  a  measure,  the  advan- tages of  which  are  variously  regarded  by  the  different  members  of our  Government,  we  desire  to  be  supplied  with  more  information than  we  now  possess  relating  to  those  islands.  It  would  be  expedient, therefore,  in  the  first  instance,  that  steps  should  be  taken  to  explore them,  and  to  report  upon  the  sites  which  they  may  offer  both  for  the construction  of  harbours  of  refuge  on  the  coast,  and  for  the  estab- lishment of  penal  or  other  Settlements,  not  only  on  the  shores,  but also  in  the  inland  parts  of  the  islands.  We  desire  to  know  all  that can  be  ascertained,  without  incurring  great  risks  on  the  score  of health,  or  heavy  expenditure,  regarding  the  number  and  character of  the  inhabitants,  the  animal,  vegetable,  and  mineral  resources  of the  country,  the  nature  of  the  soil  and  of  the  climate,  the  quantity and  quality  of  the  water,  and  the  general  capabilities  of  the  islands as  a  place  of  residence  and  as  a  field  for  cultivation.  Whea  we  have received  from  you  this  information,  which  you  will  supply  with  all practicable  despatch,  we  shall  address  you  again  on  the  subject.
7th. — We  have  confined  ourselves  in  the  foregoing  observations to  the  case  of  the  Andaman  Islands,  to  which  the  papers  before  us principally  relate,  but  we  concur  in  opinion  with  Mr.  Grant,  who
206  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
observes  in  his  Minute  of  the  19th  of  March,  that  the  contemplated "  object  would  be  very  imperfectly  obtained  without  the  occupation of  the  Nicobar  Islands. "  Of  these  islands,  all  right  to  which  was abandoned  by  His  Danish  Majesty  in  1847,  possession  has  never been  taken  by  the  British  Government.  Forsaken  by  the  Danes  on account  of  an  insalubrity,  which  it  was  conceived  could  only  be subdued  by  an  expenditure  of  life  and  money,  for  which  there  was likely  to  be  no  adequate  return,  these  inhospitable  islands  hold  out to  usj  as  at  present  advised,  little  inducement  to  plant  the  British  flag upon  them.  But  as  it  is  possible  that  the  apprehensions  which deterred  the  Danish  Government  from  continuing  to  occupy  the islands,  may  have  been  unfounded  or  exaggerated,  we  desire  that you  will  furnish  us  with  such  information  bearing  upon  the  reputed insalubrity  of  the  Nicobars,  as  you  possess,  or  may  be  able  to  obtain, information  calculated  to  enable  us  to  form  an  opinion  respecting the  expediency  or  inexpediency  of  taking  formal  possession  of  the islands.
No.  85.  No.  14,  dated  April  8tb,  1857.
From— The   Right  Hon'ble  Viscount  Canning,  the   Hon'ble  J.  Dorin,
Major-General  J.  Low,  and  the  Hon'ble  B.  Peacock, To— The  Hon'ble  the  Court  of  Directors  of  the  East  India  Company.
We  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  Despatch No.  37,  dated  1st  October  last,  requesting,  before  deciding  upon  the expediency  of  forming  a  Settlement  in  the  Andaman  Islands,  to  be supplied  with  more  information  relating  to  those  islands,  and  directing that  they  may  explored  and  a  report  submitted  on  certain  points, also  requesting  to  be  furnished  with  information  bearing  upon  the reputed  insalubrity  of  the  Nicobar  Islands,  before  taking  formal possession  of  those  islands.
2.  With  respect  to  the  Andaman  Islands,  we  beg  to  acquaint  you that  the  proper  time  at  which  to  begin  an  exploration  of  these  islands is  at  the  cessation  of  the  south-west  monsoon,  when  the  dangerous part  of  the  coast  is  accessible,  and  when  there  is  least  risk  to  health.
\VITH  THE  ANDAMANE3E.
207
3.  Even  if  the  Government  of  India  had  a  steam  vessel  at  its  dis- posal, we  doubt  whether  at  this  advanced  season  of  the  year  it  would be  expedient  to  begin  to  organize  an  expedition  ;  but  as  we  have  not got  a  vessel  for  this  or  any  other  purpose,  it  is   unnecessary  to  con- sider that  point.
4.  For  these  reasons,  we  beg  to  state  that  we  propose  to  defer acting  upon  your  directions  until  next  Autumn.
5.  We  do  not  anticipate  much  difficulty  or  risk  (except  to  health) in  the  undertaking,  if  proper  precautions  are  observed,   and  on  this account  the  expedition  will  probably  need  to  be  upon  a  larger  scale than  your   Hon'ble  Court  contemplate.     Guards,   baggage  animals, and  supplies  of  all  sorts  must  accompany  it.
208
A  HISTORY   OF   OUK  RELATIONS
CHAPTER  VII.
Formation  of  the  "  Andaman  Committee" — Captain  Man  directed  to  take  possession of  the  Andamans — Policy  to  be  observed  towards  the  Andamanese — Dr.  Monat's book — Comments — Notes  on  the  Andamanese  man  taken  to  Calcutta  by  Dr. Mouat — Despatch  from  the  "Andaman  Committee" — Letters  to  Captain  Man — Despatch  from  the  Court  of  Directors.
ON  the  20th  November,  1857,  the  Government  of  India  issued orders  to  Dr.  F.  J.  Mouat,  Dr.  G.  R.  Hay  fair,  and  Lieutenant  J.  A Heathcote,  I.N.S  to  proceed  to  the  Andamans  in  order  to  examine the  shores  of  the  Islands,  and  select  the  best  site  which  may  be  found there  for  the  establishment  of  a  Penal  Settlement,  Dr.  Mouat  being the  President  of  this  Committee.
The  party  sailed  from  Calcutta  on  the  23rd  of  November,  1857, in  the  Hon'ble  Company's  Steam  Erigate  Semiramis,  for  Moulmein, arriving  there  on  the  1st  December.
Taking  with  them  twelve  short  term  Burmese  convicts,  and  a guard  of  three  convict  Peons,  to  clear  the  jungle,  they  left  Moulmein on  the  8th  December,  in  the  Hon'ble  Company's  Steam  Vessel Pluto,  and  arrived  in  Port  Cernwallts  on  the  llth  December.
Port  Cornwallis,  Stewart's  Sound,  the  Archipelago  Islands,  Bar- ren Island,  Old  Harbour  (now  Port  Blair),  Rutland  Island  and  the Cinque  Islands,  a  new  harbour,  now  called  Port  Mouat,  Port  Camp- bell, the  Middle  Strait,  and  Interview  Island  were  examined,  and  the Committee  left  the  Islands  again  on  the  1st  January,  1858,  for Calcutta,  submitting  on  their  arrival  the  following  able  and  exhaust- ive report.
On  their  recommendation  the  Old  Harbour  was  named  Port  Blair and  fixed  upon  as  the  site  for  the  new  Settlement.  Captain  H.  Man (who  ten  years  afterwards  was  appointed  Superintendent  of  Port  Blair, and  in  1869  annexed  the  Nicobars),  Executive  Engineer  and Superintendent  of  Convicts  at  Moulmein,  was  directed  to  proceed  to Port  Blair >  take  possession  of  the  Andaman  Islands,  and  prepare  a
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  209
Settlement,    to    which   the  Government  of  India  would  send  convicts and  a  Superintendent  as  soon  as  practicable.
It  should  be  observed  that,  as  a  precautionary  measure,  the  Anda- man Islands  were  again  annexed  to  the  British  Crown,  though  no real  doubt  was  felt  as  to  our  right  to  occupy  them.  So  unattractive, indeed,  so  dreaded,  have  they  always  been,  that  none  of  the  other  na- tions, who  at  different  times  have  formed  settlements  on  the  shores  of the  Bay  of  Bengal,  have  ever  annexed  them,  and  England  is  the  only country  under  whose  jurisdiction  the  Andamauese  have  been
Captain  Man  was  told  that  when  convicts  were  located  on  the mainland,  it  might  be  necessary  to  arm  a  limited  number  of  them  with muskets  to  keep  off  the  savages,  thus  showing  that  the  Government of  India  were  fully  alive  to  the  hindrance  and  annoyance  the  An- damanese  would  probably  cause.  On  this  order  the  Court  of  Directors, while  admitting  the  aggressiveness  of  the  Andamanese,  directed  that  all precautions  should  be  taken  to  protect  them  from  collisions  with  the convicts,  which  "  must  end  in  the  extermination  of  the  weaker  race." They  evidently  regarded  with  little  approval  the  proposal  to  arm  the convict  sepoys  against  the  aborigines.
This  policy  of  the  Court  of  Directors  towards  the  Andamanese  has been  continued  to  the  present  day.  It  was  the  same  in  Lieutenant Blair's  Settlement  of  1790,  and  is  the  same  now.  Even  when  the  servants of  the  Government  of  India  would  appear  at  times  to  have  been  provok- ed almost  beyond  endurance  by  the  implacable  hostility  and  treachery of  the  Andamanese,  the  higher  authorities  in  England  and  India  have always  insisted  on  a  leniency  and  consideration  being  shown  to  them, which  is  certainly  much  in  excess  of  their  deserts.  But  the  Govern- ment appear  to  have  thought,  and  rightly,  that  the  Andamanese  are more  in  the  position  of  irresponsible  children,  than  of  reasoning  ene- mies, and  have  treated  them  accordingly.
Though  the  race  are  now  rapidly  becoming  extinct  from  causes which  will  be  given  further  on,  the  English  have  nothing  to  reproach themselves  with  regarding  the  Andamanese,  whatever  may  have  been the  case  in  Tasmania  ;  and,  having  the  unfortunate  experiences  of that  penal  colony,  and  our  treatment  of  the  aborigines  there,  before
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  KELATIONS
them,  the  Government  of  India  adopted  a  policy  towards  the  abori- gines of  the  Andaman  Islands  which  has  made  them,  above  all  races of  savages,  the  most  carefully  tended  and  petted.
As  Dr.  Mouat's  Report,  and  his  subsequent  book  on  the  Andamans, have  been  accepted  for  a  long  period  as  authoritative  and  decisive  on matters  relating  to  the  Andamanese,  it  will  be  as  well  to  examine this  report  closely  in  order  to  see  what  grounds  exist  for  its  high scientific  position.
Dr.  Mouat  came  into  contact  with  the  Andamanese  on  four  occa- sions only,  each  of  a  few  hours'  duration.  He  knew  nothing  of their  language,  and  the  meetings  were  hostile  on  the  part  of  the
savages.
His  Report  is  perfectly  straightforward  and  accurate,  the  only points  where  his  conclusions  were  not  correct  being  the  follow- ing :—
Paragraph  25. — A  recent  survey  has  shown  that  there  are  plenty of  good  trees,  the  timber  of  which  is  suitable for  building  purposes,  in  Stewart's  Sound.
Paragraph  55. — It  has  since  been  found  that  the  Mangosteen does  well,  but  the  Lichi,  though  it  grows  well, will  not  fruit,  and  all  our  efforts  have  failed to  make  the  Loquat  thrive.
Paragraph  93. — This  shows  that  at  first  Dr.  Mouat  was  parti- ally  misled  by  Mr.  Quigley's  pamphlet,  and no  doubt  the  bitter  manner  in  which  he, justifiably,  speaks  of  this  author  in  his  book, results  from  his  experiences  at  Interview Island.
Paragraph  106.— This  shows  that  Dr.  Mouat  thought  that  all the  Andamanese  were  one  tribe,  though  he changed  his  opinion  afterwards ;  and  in  his book,  alluding  to  Colebrooke's  vocabulary (and  his  own  non -success  with  the  word
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  211
Padoo),  he  remarks  that  the  Andamanese  man he  brought  from  Interview  Island  to  Calcutta in  January,  1858,  did  not  understood  a  word of  it.  He  thinks  it  possible  that  there  may be  different  dialects  among  the  aborigines  in the  Great  Andaman.
Paragraph  108. —  Shows  that  he  had  no  idea  of  the  existence  of the  firemtaga  tribes,  and  his  remarks  on  this point,  coupled  with  those  of  Major  Symes,  led the  public  to  believe,  until  Mr.  Man  published his  Monograph  on  the  Andamanese  in  1882, that  no  aborigines  lived  in  the  interior  of  the Islands.
Paragraph  118. — Dr.  Mouat  mixes  up  the  bows  of  the  North  and South  Andaman  Groups  of  Tribes,  having  seen the  former  at  Interview  and  Craggy  Islands and  the  latter  at  Port  Campbell.  (This marked  difference  in  so  universally  used  a weapon  in  different  parts  of  the  Islands  should have  led  him  to  suspect  the  existence  of  more than  one  tribe.)
Paragraph  121. — The  sounding-boards,  cut  from  padouk  wood, and  used  instead  of  drums  at  the  dances,  have often  been  mistaken  for  shields,  to  which  they have  a  considerable  resemblance.
Paragraph  123. — The  Andamanese  carry  their  baskets  on  their backs,  suspended  from  a  cord  which  goes across  the  shoulders  and  chest.  The  iron  knife is  used  exclusively  for  cutting  food.
Paragraph  124.— Neither  "  wild  spinach  "  nor  anything  resembl- ing it  is  known  to,  or  eaten  by  the  Andaman- ese. It  is  difficult  to  understand  what  Dr. Mouat  is  alluding  to  here.  He  may  have  seen the  leaves  used  for  medicinal  purposes.
212  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
Paragraph  126. — His  remarks  about  the  shaving  of  the  hair  are
incorrect.
In  his  book,  subsequently  published,  the  errors  are,  however,  nu- merous. I  have  been  told  on  good  authority  that  this  book  was written  in  England,  partly  from  his  Report,  and  partly  from  informa- tion supplied  after  the  Settlement  had  been  opened,  by  officials  whose stories  of  the  aborigines  were  derived  from  convicts  and  Naval  Bri- gade men ;  and  Dr.  Mouat,  who  was  in  India  and  much  engaged  in official  work,  was  not  responsible  for  many  of  the  statements  in  it. This  appears  to  be  very  probable,  and  would  account  for  much  which  is told  in  the  book,  but  which  Dr.  Mouat  did  not  see  and  would  not  have been  likely  to  imagine.
As  will  be  noticed,  he  took  to  Calcutta  with  him  in  January,  1858, an  Andamanese  lad,  who  had  been  taken  prisoner  in  the  engage- ment off  the  South  end  of  Interview  Island.  The  subsequent  history of  this  youth  is  : —
ts  In  Calcutta  he  attracted  much  attention,  being  the  first  Andama- nese seen  there  since  Kyd  and  Blair  took  theirs  up.  Being  alone and  unable  to  converse  with  any  one  he  soon  pined,  and  on  the  loth January,  1858,  Dr.  Mouat  wrote  to  the  Secretary  to  the  Government of  India  that  the  Andamanese  had  been  so  seriously  ill  since  his arrival  that  he  should  be  returned  to  the  Andamans  at  once.
"  He  first  had  cholerine,  which  was  treated  successfully  ;  then bronchitis,  which  he  could  not  shake  off,  and  which  threatened  to merge  into  a  low  form  of  typhoid  inflammation  of  the  lung.
"  He  was  sent  back  to  the  Andamans,  and  landed  on  the  South end  of  Interview  Island,  the  place  from  whence  he  had  been  origi- nally taken.  A  quantity  of  presents  were  given  to  him,  but  nothing was  ever  seen  of  him  again."
By  1880  the  other  Andamanese  on  Interview  Island  had  com- pletely forgotten  the  whole  occurrence,  and  I  have  not  been  able  to learn  anything  about  the  man.
WITH  THE  ANDAMASESE.  218
Home  Department.  Judicial.  No.  3  of  19th  January,  1858. To — The  Hon'ble  tho  Court  of  Directors  of  the  East  India  Company. With  advertence  to  the  6th  paragraph  of  your  Hon'ble  Court's Despatch  No.  24  of  1857,  dated  the  8th  April,  and  to  our  letter  No.  2 of  1858,  dated  the  7th  January,  we  have  the  honour  to  state  for  your Hon'ble  Court's  information,  that  on  the  20th  November  last  we appointed  a  Committee,  composed  of  Dr.  F.  J.  Mouat,  the  Inspector of  Jails  in  the  Lower  Provinces,  Assistant  Surgeon  G.  R.  Playfair, M.D.,  and  Lieutenant  J.  A.  Heathcote  of  the  Indian  Navy,  to  examine the  Andaman  Group  of  Islands,  with  a  view  to  a  selection  of  a  site for  the  establishment  a  Penal  Settlement  for  the  reception,  in  the  first instance,  of  Mutineers,  Deserters,and  Rebels  sentenced  to  imprisonment in  banishment,  and  eventually  for  the  reception  of  all  convicts  under sentence  of  transportation,  whom,  for  any  reason,  it  may  not  be  thought expedient  to  send  to  the  Straits  Settlements  or  to  the  Tenasserim Provinces.
2.  We  enclose  a  copy  of  the  instructions  which  we   gave  to   the Committee.
3.  The  Committee  left  Calcutta  on  the  23rd  November  last,  in  the Hon'ble  Company's  Steam   Vessel  Semiramis  for  Moulmein,  whence they  proceeded  in  the  Pluto,  to  the  Andamans,  arriving  there   on  the llth  December  following.     They  have  now  returned  to  Calcutta,  and we  have  the  honour  to  forward  for  your  Hon'ble  Court's  information, a  copy  of  the  able,  useful,    and  interesting  report  which  they  have submitted  to  us.
4.  In    accordance    with  tbe  recommendation  of  the  Committee, we  have  selected  the  "Old  Harbour"  henceforward  to  be  distinguished by  the  name  of  "  Port  Blair,"  as  the  locality  of  the  proposed  Penal Settlement ;  and  we  have  directed  Captain  H.  Man,   the  Executive Engineer  and  Superintendent  of  Convicts  at  Moulmein,  to  proceed  at once  to  the  spot  with  all  the  means  necessary  for  clearing  a  site,   and otherwise  preparing  for  the  reception  of  the  convicts.
5.  Captain  Man  has  been  instructed,  as  a  preliminary  step,   to  re- take  formal  possession   of  the  Andaman  Group,   with  the  view  of
21  j,  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
avoiding  any  doubt  or  difficulty  that  may  arise  from  the  circumstance of  their  having  been  deserted  in  1796.
6.  A  copy  of  our  proceedings  on  the  report  of  the  Andaman  Com- mittee is  also  enclosed  for  your  Hon'ble  Court's  information.
No.  2436,  dated  the  20th  November,  1S57,
From — C.  BEADON,  Esq.,  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  India,
To — P.    J.    MOUAT,  Esq.,   M.D.,  G.  R.  Playfair,  Esq.,  M.D.,  Lieutenant J.  A.  Healhcote,  I.N.
I  am  directed  to  inform  you  that  the  Right  Hon'ble  the Governor  General  in  Council  has  been  pleased  to  appoint  you  to  be  a Committee  to  examine  the  shores  of  the  Andaman  Group  of  Islands, and  to  select  the  best  site  which  may  be  found  there  for  the  establish- ment of  a  penal  settlement.
2.  The  first  requisites  of  such  a  Settlement  are  a  secure  and  acces- sible harbour,  abundance  of  wood  and  water,  a  healthy   situation    for a  jail   and  convict   lines,    and  considerable   extent  of  country  in  the vicinity  fit  for  clearance  and   cultivation.     It   is   desirable   also   that the  jail  should,  if  possible,  be  located  on  an  islet,  separated  from   the main  island  by  a  channel  affording  safe  anchorage  for  vessels  of  light draught,  and  too  wide  for  any  convict  to  attempt  to   cross   by  swim- ming.    By  this  means  it  would  be  more  easy  to  maintain  an  entire separation  between  convicts  kept  in  close   confinement   and   those   to whom  some  degree  of  liberty  is  allowed.
3.  Dr.  Mouat  will  be  President  of  the  Committee,  and  in  general charge  of  the  expedition.     His  attention  will  be  more   particularly given   to   matters  connected  with  the  enquiry,  with  which  his   duties as  Inspector  of  Jails  in  Bengal  have  made  him  familiar.     The  medical and  scientific  duties  of  the  expedition  will  devolve  upon  Dr.  Playfair. And  those  connected  with  the  survey  of  the   coast   and   the    harbour, will  be  attended  to  by  Lieutenant  Heathcote.     Lieutenant    Heathcote will   understand   that  a  minute  or  detailed  survey  is  not  required  ;  it will  be  sufficient  to  ascertain  the  general  features  of  the  channels   or anchorages.     But  the  Governor  General   in  Council  does   not   doubt that   the   members  of  the  Committee  will  cammuuicate  freely  with
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  215
each  other,  and  be  able  to  submit  the  result  of  their  investigations   in a  combined  report.
4.  The   Committee  are  to  proceed  to   Moulmein  iu  the  Hon'blo Company's  Steam  Frigate  Semiramis,   which  will  leave    Calcutta   on Monday   next,   the   23rd  instant.     At   Moulmein   the  Hon'ble  Com- pany's Steam  Vessel  Pluto  will  be  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  Com- mittee, and  in  her  they  will  proceed  to   the   Andamans,   taking   sucli course  as,  under  all  circumstances,  may  appear  most  advisable.  Hav- ing  completed    their   enquiries,    the   Committee  can  either  return  to Calcutta  direct  in  the  Pluto,   or  find  their  way  back  in  any  other way  that  may  seem  preferable.
5.  The  Committee  should  not  separate  till  their  report  is  complete, and   this  His  Lordship  in    Council  trusts  will  not  be  later  than  the middle  of  January.     The  value  of  the  report  will  be  greatly  enhanced if   it  be  accompanied   by   photographic   view   sof   the   various  sites reported  on.
6.  The  Committee  should  be  accompanied  to  the   Andamans  by   a small  guard  of  Europeans,  which  can  be   furnished  from  among   the men  of  the  Indian  Navy  by  the  Senior  Naval  Officer.
7.  All  the  information  in  the  possession  of  the  Government   relat- ing to  the  Andaman  Islands  will  be  placed  at  the  disposal   of  the Committee.   
Dated  the  15th  January,  1858.
From — C.  BEACON,  Esq.,  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  India, To— F.   J.  MOUAT,   Esq.,    M.D.,  G.  R.  Playfair,  Esq.,  M.D.,  Lieutenant J.  A.  Heathcote,  I.N.
I  am  directed  by  the  Eight  Hon'ble  the  Governor  General  in Council  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  report,  dated  the  1st instant,  and  to  convey  to  you  the  cordial  thanks  of  the  Government of  India  for  the  judicious,  prompt,  and  effectual  manner  in  which  you have  carried  out  the  instructions  contained  in  my  letter  of  the  20th November  last,  as  well  as  for  the  business-like  and  practical  shape  in which  you  have  submitted  the  result  of  your  investigation.  Your proceedings  from  first  to  last  are  entirely  approved.
216
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
2.  His  Lordship  in  Council  agrees  with  you  as  to  the    selection   of the  Old  Harbour  (which  it  is  intended   shall   henceforward   bear   the name   of  Port   Blair)   for   a  Penal  Settlement,  and  instructions  have this   day   been   issued   to   Captain    H.  Man,  Executive  Engineer  and Superintendent  of  convicts  at  Moulmein,  to   proceed   thither   in    the Pluto  as  soon  as  possible  after  her  return,  with  all  the   means   neces- sary for  clearing  a  site  and  otherwise  preparing  for   the   reception    of convicts.
3.  I  am  directed  to  request  that  50  impressions  may    be  made   of the  series  of  photographs  taken  during  the  expedition,  and  that,  after reserving  five  copies  for  the  use  of  the  Members  of  the  Committee,  the remainder    (of  which   ten   should    he   mounted)    may  be  sent  to  this office.     The   canoe  and  implements  should  also  be  properly  packed  for transmission    to   the   Hon'ble    Court   o£    Directors.     The  Geological specimens  had  better  be  deposited  in  the  Museum.
4.  The  ne>v  Harbour  discovered  by  the  Committee   on   the  West coast  of  the  Great  Andaman  opposite  to  Port  Blair,  will  be  called  Port Mouat  after  the  President.
5.  The   Governor   General   in   Council  entirely  approves  of  your having   brought   to    Calcutta   the   inhabitant  of  the  Andamans,  who after  the  unprovoked  attack  made  by  the  savages  on  the  boats  of  the expedition,  fell  alive  into  your  hands.     His  Lordship  in   Council  had hoped  that  this  man  would  have  become  an  useful  medium  of  commu- nication  between   the    Officers   of  Government  and  his  own  country- men, and  have  given  assistance  in  reclaiming  them  from  the  state  of profound   and   primitive   barbarism   in   which   they  now  exist.     He regrets,  however,  to  learn  from  Dr.  Mouat's  subsequent  letter  of  this date,  that  the  health  of  the  man  has  suffered  so  much  since  his  arri- val in  Calcutta  that  it  is  thought  advisable  to  send  him  to  sea.
6.  The  Governor  General  in  Council  thinks  it  best  that  the  Pluto should  proceed  from  hence  in  the  first  instance  to  Interview  Island and  land  the  native  as  near  as  possible  to  the  place  at  which  he  was taken,  and  His  Lordship  in  Council  desires  me  to  request  that  he  may be  abundantly  supplied  with  useful  articles  of  peace,  such  as  car- penter's tools,  knives,  cotton  cloth,  thread,  cords,  axes,  metal  pots
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  217
and  pans,  as  well  as  with  beads,  looking-glasses  and  such  like  objects of  savage  finery.  And  every  possible  endeavour  should  again  be made  to  assure  his  countrymen,  both  through  him  and  by  direct  signs, that  our  objects  are  friendly,  and  that  they  have  nothing  to  expect  but good  treatment  at  our  hands.  Dr.  Mouat  will  be  so  good  as  to  give the  Commander  of  the  Pluto  all  needful  instructions  on  this  head.
Dated  Port  Andaman,  the  let  January,  1853. From — The  ANDAMAN  COMMITTEE,
To — C.    BEADON,   Esq.,   Secretary   to   the    Government   of  India,  Home Department.
We  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter No.  2436,  dated  the  20th  November,  1857,  intimating  that  the  Eight Hon'ble  the  Governor  General  in  Council  had  been  pleased  to  ap- point us  to  be  a  Committee  to  examine  the  shores  of  the  Andaman Group  of  Islands,  and  to  select  the  best  site  that  may  be  found  for the  establishment  of  a  Penal  Settlement.
2.  The  requisites  for  such  a  Settlement  were  pointed  out,  and  we were  directed  to  proceed  on  the  Hon'ble  Company's  Steam  Frigate Semiramis  to  Moulmein,   where  the  steamer  Pluto  was  to  be  placed at  our  disposal  for  the  purpose  of  conveying  us  to  the  scene  of  our labours.
3.  We  accordingly  embarked  on  the  Semiramia  on  Monday,  the 23rd  of  November,   and  reached  Moulmein  on  the    afternoon    of Tuesday,  the  1st  of   December,  1859.    The  Pluto  was  at  that  time absent,  but  returned  on  Friday,  the  4th,  and  was  prepared  for  sea with  all  possible  despatch.
4.  To  protect  our  party   when  engaged  in  exploring,  Captain
Campbell,   Indian  Navy,   commanding   the  Semi ramie,  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  Committee,  an officer  and  twenty  European  seamen  from  his  crew.*
*  The  fact  is  of  interest  that  Walker,  the  famous  filibuster,  who  afterwards  commanded  the insurgents  in  Nicaragua  and  was  shot  there,  was  one  of  these  men,  and  was  even  then  known  as a  wild  and  dangerous  character  and  an  exceptionally  accurate  shot.
2  F
218  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
To  enable  us  to  penetrate  the  dense  jungle  which  was  said,  and which  we  found,  to  cover  the  Andamans,  the  Officiat- ing Commissioner  of   Moulmein,  Major  A.  Fytche, sanctioned  the  temporary   transfer  of    twelve    short  term    Burmese Convicts  accustomed  to  forests,  with  a  guard  of  three    Convict  Peons. Without  the  aid  of  these  men  we  could  have  made  no  progress  in   the examination   of   the  coast.     Major  Fytche  also   made  over  to  us  the boring    instrument   in   store  at   Moulmein,  and   Captain  Man,  the Superintendent  of  the   Convict   Establishment,  taught  the  prisoners the  use  of  that  important  instrument  prior  to  our  departure.
5.  Thus  armed   and   equipped,  we  left  Moulmein  on  the  morning Departure  from  Mod-     of  Tuesday,  the  8th  of  December,  and  anchored   in
mein.  port   Cornwallis  at  8J  A.M.,  of  Friday,  the  ]  1th  of
the  same  month.
6.  Our  object  in  first  visiting  the  old  settlement  was  to  ascertain
by  personal  examination  the  causes  of  its  extreme
Fort  Cornwallis.  ,       ,,,  .  .,
unhealthmess,  to  guide  us  in  our  investigation into  the  other  localities  likely  to  possess  sites  suitable  for  a  Penal Settlement.
7.  We  do  not  deem  it  necessary  to  furnish  a  detailed  description of   this  magnificent  harbour,  and  the  Islands  enclosed  within  it.     The survey  of  Lieutenant  Blair  was  found  to   be  generally  accurate,  and, with  the  exception  hereinafter  noted,  the  place  seems  to  have  under- gone no  material  change  since  the  abandonment  of  the   settlement  in 1796  for  reasons  which   are  contained  in  the  records  of  the  Govern- ment of  India.
8.  We  landed  on  the  North-East  corner  of  Chatham  Island,  where all  that  could  be  found  of  the  old  settlement  was  lying  on  the  beach, in  the  form  of  detached  fragments   of  a  substantial    brick    build- ing.
9.  The   rear  wall  only  was  standing  and  contained  a  door  and  two windows.     The  remainder  of  so  much  of  the  house  as   had  not   been destroyed   by  the  encroachment   of   the  sea,  which  in  this  spot  must have  advanced  some   40   or   50  feet,  was  strewed  with  large  pieces  of masonry   and   brickwork   on    the   beach.     The   brickwork,  cemented
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  219
with  shell  lime,  was  of  excellent  quality,  which  was  shown  by  the retention  of  the  form  of  the  arches  which  had  fallen.  The  masonry had  been  detuched  in  masses  by  the  vegetation  growing  in  fissures, which  had  probably  been  caused  by  the  action  of  the  sea.  The detached  bricks,  which  were  scattered  over  a  space  of  some  200  yards had  been  rounded  by  the  same  agency.
10.  A  small  mound,  about  100  feet  in   height,   was   immediately behind,  and  to  the  South- West  of  the  building.     Bounded   fragments of  masonry  which  had  probably  formed  the  basement  of  a  pillar  were found  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  on  the  crest  of  which  were  layers  of  small bricks  imbedded  in  the  roots  of  the  trees.     No  inscriptions,    wells,   or other  indications   of   the   existence   of  a  settlement  could  be  found , owing  to  the  perfect  impenetrability  of  the  jungle.     A  few  cocoanut trees,  palms,   and  acacias,  and  a  number  of  larger  trees  not  identified, covered  the  island.     Two  small  water-courses  were   seen,   one   on  its Northern,  the  other  on  its  Western  aspect.
11.  On  its  South- Western  side  is  an  extensive  mud   bay,   dry  in spring   tides,   with  broad  belts  of  mangrove,  and  low  flat  country  on the  opposite  shore  in  the  same  direction.
12.  The   only   sea  breeze  that  could  reach  the  island  is  the  North- East  wind,  and  that  could  have  blown  but  over  a  small  portion  of   its Northern  aspect.
13.  It  thus  appears  to  have  been  ill-selected  as  a  site  for  a   Settle- ment,  two-thirds   of  its  own  shore  being  fringed  with  a  dense  belt  of Mangrove,  and  the  prevailing  winds  during  the  greater  part  of  the  year at  its   most  unhealthy   season,   blowing  over  the  swamp  surrounding the  Island.     Conditions  more  certainly  calculated  to  secure  the  largest measure  of  unhealthiness,  it  would  be  difficult  to  find.
14.  Photographic  views  were  taken  of  the  remains  of  the  settle- ment, and  of  some  native  fishing  huts  in  its  immediate  vicinity.
15.  Of  the  savages  themselves  nothing  was  seen,  although  huts and  other  indications  of  their  proximity   and   recent   presence   were found  on  the  mainland,  in  a  Bay  on  the  North  side  of  the  Port.
16.  The  results  of  our  intercourse  with  the  Natives  will  be  men- tioned in  a  separate  paragraph.
JF2
220  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
17.  On  leaving  Port  Cornwallis  we  steered  to  Craggy  Island  a  few
miles  to  the  southward,  for  the  purpose  of  ascer- taining if  it  were  practicable  to  mount  the   Saddle
Hill,  the  highest  point  of  the  Islands,  in  order  to  obtain  some  idea  of
the  interior  of  the  Great  Andaman.
18.  Upon  a  near  examination  of  the  spot    we  considered  it  to  be impracticable  in  the  time,  and  with  the  means  at  our  disposal — so  the project  was  abandoned.     At  this  point,  we  first  came  in  contact   with the  inhabitants,  as  will  be  mentioned  hereinafter.
19.  "We  then  proceeded  to  Sound  Island,  as  the  next  locality  on Sound  island.        the  East  Coast,  affording  promise  of  an  eligible  site.
20.  We  steamed  through  Stewart's  Sound,  and  right  round  the island  which  is  of  an  irregular  quadrilateral  form,  forming  one  side  of a  large  land-locked  bay,  accessible  at  all   seasons  to  vessels  of  every class.     The  island  appeared  to  consist  of  ridges  of  high  land  running through  it  in  all  directions,  and  prolonged  in  spurs  to  the  points  of the  bays  indenting  its  margin.     It  was  fringed  with  belts  of  man- grove,  and  surrounded  by  coral  reefs,  with  occasional   fine  sandy beaches.
21.  Towards  the  South-West  extremity  is  a  horse  shoe   shaped harbour,  nearly  three  quarters  of  a  mile  in  depth  and  rather  more than  half  a  mile  across,  the  shores  of  which  we  spent  two  days  in exploring.     On  the  Northern  and  Eastern  aspects  it  is  skirted  by coral  banks  and  rocks,   but  in  the  rest  of  its  extent,  it  has  good anchorage  ground  for  large  ships.
22.  The  ridge  surrounding  it  rises  to  a  height  of  about  120  feet, and  we  found  the  jungle  and  underwood  much  less  tangled  and  dense than  on  Chatham  Island.
23.  The  ridges  also  contained  small  plateaux  of  level  ground,  with good  drainage,  and  sufficient  in  extent  to  form  a  very  large  Settle- ment, with  an  abundance  of  clay  and  coral  for  building  purposes, and  a  rich  soil  for  cultivation.
24.  But,  it  was  deficient  in  water,  appearing  to  possess  only  the moisture  resulting  from  surface  drainage,  without  a   running  rill  of even  the  smallest  dimensions  in  any  direction  that  was  examined  for
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
221
a   mile   and  a  half.    Attempts  to  dig  and  bore,  the  latter  to  a  depth of  eleven  feet,  failed  to  procure  water.
25.  There  was  also  a  deficiency  of  forest  trees  fit  for  building purposes.
26.  Tor  these  reasons,  it  does  not  seem  to  us  to  be  a  desirable  place for  a  Settlement  of  any  kind.    There  was  no  point  from  which   a photographic  view,   calculated   to   show     its   characters,    could    be obtained.
27.  In  addition  to  local  deficiencies  and  probable    sources    of disease   from   the   belt   of  mangrove  encircling  it  in  all  directions,  in attempting  to  ascertain  the  existence  of  a  navigable  Strait  between  the Northern   and   Middle    Andaman,   we   discovered   an  extensive  tract of  the  worst  description  of   Sunderbund,   ending   in   putrid   shallows, apparently   running   towards  the  interior  of  the  island,  and  sufficient to  poison  any  place  lying  within  the  influence  of  the   winds  blowing over  it.
28.  The  ascertainment  of  the  existence  of  a  passage,  which  had  been left  undetermined  by  Lieutenant  Blair,  was  a  question  of  some  interest as,  in  the  event  of  its  furnishing  a  safe  and  ready  access  to  Interview Island  from  the  Eastern  Coast,    it  might  have  led  to  the   occupation of  that   great  island,   had  it  contained  the  other  conditions  essential to  the  formation  of  a  Settlement.     The  extent  of  the  pestilential  Sun- derbund was  not  ascertained, — but  that  no  navigable  passage  existed and  that  any  Settlement  in  its   vicinity   would   be  undesirable  were fairly  established.
29.  Having   finished  this  work,   we   again  steered  to  the  South-
ward, towards  the  Andaman  Archipelago,   a   large
Andaman  Archipelago.         ,  /.  T  i        i  ii-n  /~<
cluster  of  Islands  on  the  Eastern  Coast.
30.  The   main   land  was  bold,   with   high   undulating  hills,  and more  free  from  mangrove  than  any  portion  of  the  islands  yet  seen   by us.
31.  We  passed   round  two  sides  of  Long  Island  to  the  bay  lying between  it  and  the  shore  of  the  Great  Andaman,  but  as  no  indications of  running  streams  were  seen,  as  the  island  itself  was  low,  and  as   the opposite  shore   was  skirted   with  a   thick  belt  of  mangrove,  we  did
222  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
not  consider  it  worth  while  to  waste  any  time  in   landing  to   explore a  place  so  obviously  unsuitable.
32.  The  remaining  islands  of  the  Archipelago  we  did  not  look  at. Most  of  them  were  low,  the  absence  of  safe  ports  was  patent,  and the  navigation  too  dangerous  and  too  intricate  to  permit  of  their  being occupied  as  a  penal  settlement,  according  to  the  instructions  ]aid  down for  our  guidance.     Even  had  some  of  the  larger  islands  proved  eligi- ble in  themselves  they  would  not  have  allowed  of  sufficient  subsequent extension  to  permit  of  their  occupation  on  an  extended   scale,   with reference  to  the  amount  of  culturable  land  near  the  Settlement.
33.  Being  within  a  few  miles  of  Barren  Island   at  this   point,  and B  -ren  Island  considering  that  it  was  desirable  to  neutralize   any
possible  bad  effects  from  the  very  unwholesome places  we  had  recently  examined,  we  resolved  to  visit  and  explore  that interesting  Volcano.
34.  We  accordingly  steered  for  it  on  the  evening  of  the   17th,  and reached  it  at  4  on  the  morning  of  the  18th.     We  spent  a  few  hours  in examining  it  and  some  of  our  party  ascended  the  cone,   and   saw   the crater,   which   is   still   smouldering.     It   has   apparently  changed  in some  of  its  physical  features  since  it  was  last  described,  but   as   these are  foreign  to  the  object  of  our  mission,  they  are  recorded  in  a  separate report  by  Dr.  Playfair.
35.  The  only  fact  of  sufficient  political  importance  to  place  on record  regarding  it,  is,  that  it  contains  a  little  sulphur,  and  that  little too  inaccessible  to  be  worked  with  advantage.
86.  We  returned  to  the  Andamans  on  the   same  evening,  so   that the  expedition  cost  only  an  expenditure  of  a  few  hours  of  time.
37.  On  the  morning  of  the  19th  of  December  we  anchored  abreast
of   Chatham  Island  in   Old   Harbour,   the  site  of
Old  Harbour.  0,1
Blair  s  first  Settlement,  and  as  its  original  occupa- tion had  proved  continuously  healthy,  we  devoted  four  days  to  a  very minute  and  careful  exploration  of  the  islands  in  and  at  the  mouth  of the  harbour,  and  of  the  adjacent  main  land.
38,  The  minute  and  excellent  survey  of  Lieutenant  Blair  made  in 1789,  "we  found  to  be  a  most  useful  and  trustworthy  guide  to  the  chief
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  223
physical  features  of  the  place,  which  can  have  undergone  no   material change  in  the  long  interval  which  has  elapsed.
39.  Nearly  every  trace  of  the  original  settlement  on  Chatham  Island has   been   entirely  effaced.     A  few  bricks  and  tiles  and  a  rough  stone jetty  were  the  only  indications  oHts  occupation.     The  island  is  small, about  600  yards  in  length  by  150  in  breadth,  with  undulating  ground and   a  good   soil   covered  with   vegetation,   in  which  are  a  few  large forest  trees.     There  was  no  indication  of  water  anywhere,  but,  on  bor- ing near  the  foot  of  a  mound  at  the  North  end  of  the  islet,  it  was found  in  a  clay  bed  at  the  depth  of  twelve  feet,  and   it   instantly  rose to  within  five  feet  of  the  surface  of  the  artesian  well.
40.  The  small  strait  intervening  between  the  islet  and  the    south- ern shore  of  the  harbour  is  shallow,  with  a  rocky  bottom,  being  a  con- tinuation of  Blair's  reef.    The  water  evidently   came   therefore  from that  side,  where  it  was  subsequently  discovered  in  abundance.
41.  The  North  shore  is  high,  rising  abruptly  nearly  300  feet,  with ledges  of  cultivable  land  on  its  southern  aspect.    The  ridges  are  formed of    sandstone,    which  was  found  to   contain   several  water-courses, two  of  which  are  mentioned  by  Blair,  and  to  abound  in  bamboos,  cane, rattan,  and  a  sufficiency  of  large   forest   trees  for   building   purposes. Good   clay   for  bricks   is   abundant,   and  the  supply  of  sandstone  for building  inexhaustible  for  piers,  jetties,  the  metalling   of  roads,   and any  other  purpose  that  may  be  needed.     The  coral  reefs   in   the  more exposed  bays  would  furnish  an  unlimited  stock  of  fine  lime.   Further, limestone  of  the  finest  quality  is  procurable  on  a  promontory   about  a day's  sail  from  Old  Harbour,  and  a  few  miles  to   the   north   of   Long Island.     The  luxuriance  of  the  vegetation,  and  its  great    variety  may oe   assumed   to  be   good  proof   of  the  fertility  of  the  soil,  especially when  brought  under  regular  cultivation.
42.  The  rocks  bordering  it  abound  in  oysters  and  other   shell   fish, and  the  harbour  itself  being  quite  open  to  the  East   with   a  tidal   in- flux and  afflux,  will  doubtless  prove  a  rich  fishery.
43.  The  belt  of  mangrove  bordering  this  side  of  the  port  is  not  very extended,  and  could  scarcely  prove  a  source  of  disease   to  any   settle-
224  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
ment  of  the  southern   and  western  slopes  of  the  hills.     They  could, moreover,  be  cleared  away  without  much  difficulty.
44.  The  land  at  the  western  end  of  the  hay  is  also  elevated,   sup- plied with  fresh  water,  and  seems  to  be  very  much  of  the  same  charac- ter as  that  of  the  northern  side.
45.  Mangrove  Bay  we  did  not  examine,  as  although   it  probably leads  to  a  Sunderbund,  its  position  in  the   north-west  corner   of   the harbour  is  such   as  to  remove  it  from  the  course  of  the  prevailing monsoons,  and  thus  to  prevent  its  becoming  a  source  of  unhealthi- ness  to  the  Settlement.
46.  If  bunded  so  as  to  shut  out  the  sea,  the  extreme  rise  of  which is  only  seven  feet,  it  can  doubtless  be  reclaimed   hereafter,   and   form good   rice  land,   as   at  Kyouk  Phyoo  in  the  Island  of  Ramree  on  the coast  of  Arracan,  which  has  been  rendered  both  healthy  and   produc- tive by  an  embankment  of  the  nature  referred  to.
47.  The  land  on  the  southern  aspect  of  the  harbour  is  lower,  even more  plentifully  supplied  with  water,  and  from  the   character   of  its dense  and  multiform  vegetation  seems  to  possess  a   richer   and   more promising  soil.     Among   the   plants   identified  were  a   few  coconut trees,  a  thatching  palm,  some  varieties  of  acacia,  tree  ferns,  the  bam- boo, the  rattan,  cane,  and  others  not  necessary  to  record.
48.  In  many  places,  particularly  where  directly  exposed  to  the  sea, there  is  little  or  no  mangrove  skirting  it.
49.  Ross's   Island  at  the   entrance  of  the  harbour  is  f  of  a  mile long  by  ^  a  mile  at  its  broadest  part,   is  low  on  the  western  side, gradually  rising  to  an  elevation  of  about  160  feet  on  its  eastern  shore, the  rock  being  sandstone.    It  acts  as  a  breakwater  against  the  North- East  Monsoon,  and  appears   from  the  hospital  having  been  placed there  formerly,  to  have  been  used  as  a  sanitarium,  for  which  purpose it  appears  to  us  to  be  well  adapted.     It  is   bounded  by   smooth  rocks on  its  sea  face,  and  contains  large  forest  trees,  with  vigorous  and  not very  rank  under  vegetation.
50.  We  found  no  water  on  it,  and  no  vestige  of  its  former  occupa- tion, but,  from  the  character  of  the  adjacent  land  and  the  shallowness of  the  bay  separating  it  from  the  main  land  to  the  southward,  we  have
WITH  THE  ANDA.MAXKSK
no  doubt  that  boring  would  have  found  it.  It  is  more  than  probable that  when  the  early  hospital  existed  on  it  that  the  supply  of  water was  obtained  from  a  well,  but  on  this  and  many  othor  points  of  inter- est and  importance,  the  precis  furnished  to  the  Committee  contains no  information  whatever.  The  original  report  of  Lieutenant  Blair most  probably  contains  it.
51.  The  Committee  are  not  aware  of  any  physical  indications   by which  the  healthiness  of  an  uncleared  locality  can  be    absolutely  pre- dicated ;  but,  so  far  as  ordinary  experience  can  be  accepted  as   a   safe guide,  Old  Harbour  seems  to  afford  fair  promise  of  proving  as  healthy as  any  locality  similarly  situated  in  a  tropical  region.
52.  Its  means  of  drainage  are  ample  and  most   efficient  ;  the   re- moval of  all  effete  matter  beyond  the  reach  of  causing   mischief   will be  easy  ;  and  any  possible  existent  tracts  of  ni'irsh  land  do  not  lie   in the  direction  of  the  prevailing  winds.
53.  "We  are,  therefore,   of   opinion  that,  as  a  small  portion  of  it, Chatham  Kland,  proved  continuously  healthy  during  the  time  it  was occupied  sixty  years  since  ;  with  ordinary  care  in  the   construction   of buildings,  and  strict  attention  to  conservancy   arrangements,   a  more extended  and  permanent  settlement  will  prove  equally  salubrious.
51.  Making  due  allowance  for  its  higher  latitude,  from  its  simila- rity to  certain  portions  of  the  East  Coast  of  Ceylon,  and  from  its  local peculiarities,  we  are  of  opinion  that  economic  plants,  such  as  the  coco- nut, the  bread  fruit  tree,  the  plantain,  the  sugar  cane,  and  the  date palm,  would  certainly  flourish  here.  Of  useful  plants  the  bamboo, rattan,  thatching  palms,  and  most  of  the  timber  trees  that  bear  expo- sure to  sea  air,  would  also  grow  well  with  a  little  care  in  cultivation.
55.  It  is  not  improbable  that  many  tropical  fruits   of   great  value, such  as  the  Mangostein,   the   Leechee,  the  Loquat,   and  others  would also  be  naturalized  without  much  difficulty.
56.  Grasses  would  also  grow  for  pasturage,  but  they  would  prob- ably be  somewhat  rank  and  coarse.
57.  From  Old  Harbour,  we  steered  again  to  the  Southward  to'Rut- and  cinque      land  Island.     The  coast  was  undulating,  hilly,  with- out mangrove,  and  ended  in  a  hold   bluff  at  the
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATION'S
entrance  to  Macpherson's  Strait.  The  southern  face  of  the  Great Andaman  was  fringed  with  mangrove,  but  it  was  not  deep,  and  could not  in  any  way  affect  the  health  of  a  settlement  at  Old  Harbour.
58.  We  devoted  two  days  to  sailing  round  Rutland  Island,  and  the examination  of  a  part  of  its  Eastern  shore,   as  well  as   of  one   of  the Cinque  Islands  in  its  vicinity.     The  former  is  a  fine  extensive  tract  of land,  hilly  at  its  northern  end,  well  wooded,  and  flatter  in  the  rest   of its  extent.     It  is  apparently  well  supplied  with  water,  must  be  healthy from  its  position,  and  the  character  of  its  vegetation  renders   it   prob- able that  it  possesses  a  fertile  soil.
59.  The  harbour  in  Macpherson's  Strait  is  accessible  from  the  east- ward at  all  seasons  of  tbe  year,  and  possesses  safe  anchorage  for  vessels of  any  burthen      Access  from  the  western  side  would  be  difficult   and dangerous  in  the  South-  West  Monsoon  ;  and  the  whole  of  that  side   of the  island  exhibited  proof  of  the  violence  of  the  weather   to  which  it is  subjected  during  a  great  part  of  the  year.
60.  The  north  shore  of  Rutland  Island  is,  unfortunately,  surrounded by  a  dense  bolt  of  mangrove  rendering  it  difficult  to  find    a   suitable landing  place.
61.  It  is,  therefore,  in  all  respects  inferior  to   Old   Harbour  for   a Settlement  ;   yet  it  may  become  very  valuable  hereafter,  should  the Andamans  be  colonized.
62.  The  second  of  the  Cinque    Islands  would   form   an   excellent isolated  station  for  very  refractory  convicts,  who  needed  entire  separa- tion.    It  is  three  miles  in  length    by  one  in  breadth  at  the   broadest part,  is  unusually  well  supplied  with  water,   and  is  separated  suffi- ciently from  all  other  land,  to  render  escape  from  it  next  to  impossible. It  is  fertile  in  some  parts,  and  would  most  likely  prove  very    healthy, but  scarcely  contains  a  sufficiency  of  land  for  cultivation  to   maintain a  settlement.     During  the  North-East  Monsoon  it  is  easily  accessible, but  approach   to   it   would  be  somewhat  difficult  in  the  South-  West Monsoon.     A.  landing  could  always  however  be  effected  at   its  North- East  corner  with  a  little  care.
63.  Its  distance  from  Old  Harbour  being  only  2  i   miles,    it   could
WITH  THS  ANDAMAN  KSE.  227
without  much  trouble  be  easily   superintended,    visited,   and  supplied from  tbat  place,  if  necessary,  at  all  seasons  of  the  year.
64.  We  did  not  examine  the  Labyrinth  Islands,  as  they  were  evi-
dently unsuitable  for  convict  settlements,  being closely  surrounded  by  reefs,  difficult  of  access,  too close  to  each  other,  and  probably  not  abundantly  supplied  with  water. They  are  flat,  and  covered  with  dense,  lofty,  and  luxuriant  vegeta- tion. They  may  prove  valuable  hereafter,  as  from  their  position  they must  be  healthy.
65.  On  proceeding  northward  along  the  western  coast,  which   near Discovery  of  a  new       the  southward  of  the  Great  Andaman   is   very    free
from  mangrove  on  its  sea  face,  we  found  a  fine spacious  harbour  not  visited  or  described  by  Blair,  to  the  south-west of  Old  Harbour.  The  land  at  its  eastern  end  is  within  two  miles  of the  western  extremity  of  Old  Harbour.  It  is  surrounded  by  a  narrow belt  of  mangrove  which  is  so  placed  as  not  to  be  able  to  affect  injuri- ously the  health  of  any  Settlement  in  Old  Harbour.  A  short  road, little  more  than  two  miles  in  extent,  would  here  connect  the  eastern and  western  shores,  a  point  of  some  importance  in  their  future  occu- pation, as  by  opening  up  and  clearing  the  intermediate  land,  a  healthy sea  breeze  could  be  obtained  during  both  monsoons.
63.  The  new  harbour  is  unfortunately  accessible  only  from  the South  through  the  passage  between  the  Labyrinth  Islands,  a  naviga- tion far  too  difficult  and  dangerous  to  be  used  by  vessels  in  distress during  the  South- West  Monsoon.  On  attempting  to  run  parallel  to the  coast  in  steering  Northward,  the  coral  reefs,  which  are  here  very extensive,  were  found  to  be  too  near  the  surface  to  admit  of  the passage  of  a  vessel  of  even  such  light  draft  as  the  Pluto,  the  water shoaling  suddenly  from  8  to  1|  fathoms.  An  attempt  to  stand  to sea  in  the  direction  of  the  North  Centinel  failed  from  the  same  cause, so  we  had  to  return  through  the  Labyrinth  to  the  southward.
67.  We  next  proceeded  to  Port  Campbell,  a  very  fine  harbour, but  at  all  times  difficult  of  entrance  or  exit,  on account  of  the  direction  and  extreme  narrowness
228  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  DELATIONS
of  the  deep  water  channel  at  its  mouth.     It  is,  therefore,  unsuited  for a  settlement,  so  we  did  not  examine  it  minutely.
68.  After    this    the    Committee    proceeded    through   the    Strait
separating   Middle  from  South  Andaman,  to  ascer-
Middle  81  rait.
tain,  if  possible,  the   physical    features   of   the   in- terior of  the  island.
69.  The    Strait   was  in  the   greater  part  of  its  extent  bounded  by- very  deop  patches  of  stunted    mangrove,    the  growth    of    that  plant being   evidently  checked  by  the   quantity    of   fresh  water  that  falls into  the    Strait    during  the    rains.     At    present,    they   must    render land   lying   in    a  north-easterly   direction   extremely  unhealthy.     If reclaimed,  hereafter,  they  might  form  rich  ri  'e  lands.
70.  On  leaving  the  Middle   Strait,  we  again  proceeded  Northward
to  Interview  Island,  the  last  place  examined  by  the
Interview  Island.  .-.  .,,
Committee.
71.  This  fine  Island  lying  parallel  to,  and  at  a  small  distance  from the   main  land,  forms   a   large  and  secure  harbour  open  for  ingress and  egress  at  both  North   and  South  extremities,   hut  well  sheltered from  the   violence  of  the  South- West  Monsoon.     It  is  surrounded  by a  belt  of  mangrove  everywhere,  except   at   its   southern   end,    where the   land    is  higher   and    more    healthy    looking.     It  is  covered  with dense  vegetation,  and  seemed  to  be  well  watered.  In  all  its  other  char- acters it   bears   a  strong  resemblance  to  the  remaining  islands  on  the western  shore,  being  little  elevated,  and  bearing  evident  marks  of  the exposure  to  the  violence  of  the  elements  to  which  they  are  subjected in  the  South- West  Monsoon.
72.  It  is  more   thickly  peopled  than  most  parts  of  the  coast,  but appears  to  share  the  general  deficiency  of  animal  life  remarked  in  the whole  group.
73.  It  may  prove  a   valuable   settlement   hereafter,    and  from   its free  exposure  to  the  sea  in  the  greater  part  of  its  extent  would  most likely  be  healthy;  but  it  is,  in  all  essentials,  so  manifestly  inferior  to Old  Harbour,  that  a  very  minute  examination  of  it  was  deemed  un- necessary.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  .;£9
74.  Landfall  Island  and  the  Cocos  were  not  explored.     The  former
Lu.df.il  Mand  «•*       onlv  was  looked  at>   Dut  as  both  of  them  are  too the  locos.  directly  in  the  track  of  commerce,  and  are  deficient
in  harbours,  they  are  evidently  not  suited  for  convicc  settlements  ;  1,0 time  was,  therefore,  wasted  in  exploring  them.
75.  The  land  on  the  northern  part  of  the   western  shore    is  every- Gen™.!  appearance  of      where  much  lower  than  the  corresponding  portions
the  W,stern  Co  ,st.          Qf  the  eastcrn  coast
76.  An  attempt  to  approach  the  opening  in  the  western  end  of  the strait,  supposed  to  exist  between  the  Northern  and  Middle  Andamans, failed,   the   steamer   grounding  on   a  coral  hank  at.  a  dist-mco  of  two miles  from  the  entrance.     As  the    strait,    in    these    circumstances,    is utterly    useless   for  the   purposes   of  navigntion,  no  further  time  was spent  in  exploring  it.
77.  In  conclusion  the  Committee  are  of  opinion  that  Old  Harbour old  Harbour.          js  the  only  place  that  possesses  the  greater  number
of  the  requisites  for  a  Penal  Settlement,  and  they  accordingly  recom- mend its  occupation  for  that  purpose,  in  preference  to  any  other  of the  localities  visited  and  examined.
78.  They  cannot  refrain  from  taking  advantage  of  this  opportunity Tribute  to  Lieutenant      to  record  their  admiration  of  the  great  judgment
Blair.  of  Lieutenant    Blair,    in    originally    selecting    that
spot,  and  of  his  accuracy  as  a  Hydrographer.
79.  They  also  beg  to  suggest  that,  as  considerable  practical   incon- venience may  result  hereafter  from  the  identity  of  names  in   the   two former  settlements,  that  the  name  of  the  Old  Harbour  may  be  changed to  Port  Blair,  in  honour  of  that  distinguished  Officer.
80.  So  little  is  known  of  the  inhabitants   of   the   Andamans,   and Ethnology  of  the        tuat  ^lle  *s  so  mixed  up  with  fable  and  fiction,    as
Andamans.  to  have  induced  the  Committee  to   pay   more  than
ordinary  attention  to  all  measures  calculated  to  open  an  amicable  in- tercourse with  them,  and  to  throw  light  upon  their  habits  and  cus- toms. From  first  to  last  they  rejected  every  attempt  at  conciliation, and  either  avoided,  or  forcibly  opposed  all  attempts  to  hold  commu- nion with  them.
230  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  REf-ATlOX?
81.  Traces  of  them  were  found  on  Chatham  Island  and  the  shores of  Port  Corn \vallis  generally,  but  no  native  was  seen  there.
82.  The  first  contact   with  them  occurred   at   Craggy    Island.   On rounding  that  place  to  anchor  under  its  shelter,  a  large  party  of  them were  surprised  fishing  on  a  reef  running  out  from  the  mainland,    with a  few  separated  from  them  on  a  sandy  spit  of  the   island.     The   latter we  conjecture  to  have  been  women,  and  they  had  a  small  canoe  lying on  the  beach.     As  soon  as  the  steamer  had   anchored,   the   Committee landed  in  two  well  armed  boats.      The  people  who  had   been   seen   on the  islet  had  disappeared  in  the  dense  jungle  which  covered  it.     In the  canoe,  which  with  its  contents  was  left   exactly  as   it   was  found, beads  and  looking  glasses  were  placed,  and  the  party   immediately   re- embarked,  to  show  the  natives  that  their  intentions  were  friendly,  and free  from  even  the  semblance  of  hostility.
83.  During  and  previous  to  the  time  occupied  by   this  proceeding, the  men  on  the  reef,  ten  or  twelve  in  number,  exhibited  every  sign   of the  most  implacable  hostility.     They  gesticulated  violently,   vocifera- ted, waived  bows  and  arrows,  and  one  of  them  brandished  a  spear  with a  metallic  head,  which   gleamed  brightly  in   the  rays   of  the   setting sun.     Another  of  them  waded  to  his  waist  in  the  sea,  howled  defiance, and  shot  a  couple  of  arrows  in  the  direction  of  the  steamer.
81.  They  were  all  naked,  and  intensely  black.  They  appeared strong,  well  built,  sturdy  men  of  middle  size,  and  did  not  exhibit  the smallest  fear  of  us.
85.  We  approached  to  them  as  close  as  the  surf  on  the  reef  permit- ted, waiving  handkerchiefs,  and  shouting  the   word  Padoo  which   is given  in  a  vocabulary  published   in  the  Asiatic  Researches  by  Cole  - brooke   as  signifying  "  friend  "  in  the  language  of  the  natives  of  the Andamans.
86.  All  was  in  vain,  and  as  the  Committee  were  most  desirous  to avoid  collision  with  them  in  their  angry   mood,  which  might  have besn   caused  by   a  belief  that  their  women  were  in  danger,  the  boats were  withdrawn,  and  pulled  to  the  Southward   to  seek  a  safe  landing place  preparatory  to  searching  for  signs  of  fresh  water.     Five  of  the
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  231
savages  ran  along  the  beach  for  more  than   a   mile,   and   then  disap- peared in  the  jungle,
87.  On  rounding  a  point  some  two  miles  from  the  reef,  a  shelving, shingle  beach  was  found,  on  which  a  landing  was  effected.    There  was a  large  hut  close  to  it,  which  was  scrupulously  respected,  and  presents were  placed  in  it.     Sentries  were   posted   near  the   boats   to  prevent surprise,  and  the  party  proceeded  northward  along  the  shore,  to  look for  a  watering  place.     The  advanced  guard  had  scarcely  walked  a  hun- dred yards,  when  arrows  were  fired   at  them   from  an   open  patch  of jungle.     The  attach  was  immediately  repelled  by  a  volley  of  musketry, which  did  no  damage,  but  frightened  away  the  savages,  who  were  not again  seen  that  evening.     As  it  was  getting   dusk,   it  was  not  deemed prudent  to  run  any  further  risk  of  collision.     The  party  was,  therefore, re-embarked  without  further  adventure.
88.  On  the  following  morning,   the  canoe  was  found  to  have  been removed,  and  for  some  time  no  natives   were  seen.     As   the  steamer was  leaving  they  reappeared,  and  repeated  their  pantomime  of  hosti- lity and  defiance.
8».  Thus  ended  the  first  attempt  to  become  acquainted  with  the dreaded  Anthropophagi.
90.  The  Committee  are  particular  in  relating   the   incidents  con- nected with  their  first  essay,  as  the  same  spirit  of   conciliation  marked all  their  efforts,  and  in  every  instance  in  whjch  collision  occurred,  the aggressors  were  the  savages.
91.  On  four  occasions  they  attacked  the  approaching  party,  and were  repelled  without  bloodshed.     On  two   others    they   disappeared, leaving  their  huts  with  fires  still  kindled,  and  their  canoes  at  the  mercy of  the  Committee.     Bows,  arrows,  nets,  and  such  of  their  utensils  or weapons  as  were  calculated  to  throw  light  on  their  customs,  were  taken, their  canoes  and  dwellings  were  respected,  and  presents  were  invariably left  in  them.
92.  The  last  attempt  to  approach  them   was  the  least   happy  in  its results,  and  occurred  where  an  untoward  end  was  least  to  be  expected.
93.  It  happened  at  South    Reef  Island,    near  the   southern  extre- mity of  Interview  Island.     All  published  accounts   of  the    Andamana
A  HI.-TOHY  OF  Ol'R  U.  LMIONS
agree  in  representing  the  inhabitants  of  Interview  Island  as  more sociable,  less  savage,  and  more  disposed  to  friendly  relations  with stivmgers,  than  those  of  any  other  portion  of  the  Andaman  Group. They  have  been  described  as  aiding  in  discharging  the  cargoes  of wrecked  vessels,  and  performing  other  acts  of  amity,  which  led  the Committee  to  believe  that  they  differed  essentially  from  all  others  of the  aborigines  with  \vhom  they  had  vainly  striven  to  establish  friendly relations,  and  that  their  advances  would  at  length  be  met  in  the spirit  in  which  they  were  offered.
94.  After  steaming  round  Interview  Island  to  ascertain  its  general physical  characters,  the  Pluto  passed  to  tho  Southward  of  South  Beef Island,  and  had  turned  again  to  the  North,    when  a    group  of  natives, about  30  in  number,  were  observed   assembled  together  on  the  beach, gazing  quietly  at  the  steamer  as  she  passed.     There  were  seven  canoes lying  on  the  beach,  and  the  party  were  evidently  waiting  for  the  low t'de  to  fish  on  the  reef.
95.  The  Committee  left  the  steamer  in  the  first  cutter.     The  second cutter  followed   as   a   support  in    case   of  need,  under  the  charge   of Mr.  Cotgrave,  Midshipman  of  the  Semiramis
96.  On  approaching  the   island,   the   natives   had  taken  to  their canoes  ;  the  boats  followed,  and  soon  gained  upon  them.     All  arms  were carefully  concealed,  and  all   gestures   calculated  to  alarm  the  natives were  avoided.     When  within  a  hundred  yards  of  them  they  exhibited bows  and  arrows,  and  began  the  usual  gestures  of  hostility,  exactly  as witnessed  on  the  east  coast.
97.  Three  of  their  canoes  were  isolated  from  the  rest.     The  men  in the  first  cutter  ceased  rowing,   and  the    boat  drifted    quietly  towards tl-em."    Handkerchiefs  were  waived,  presents  were  held  up  and  shown, the  shiboleth,  Padoo,  was  shouted,  and  no  act  of  hostility  was  commit- ted by  anyone  in  the  cutter.
98.  The  leading  canoe  was  seen  to  be  gradually  edging  away  and when  within  about  fifteen  yards  of  us,  the  men  in  all  the  canoes simultaneously  started  up,  and  discharged  a  flight  of  arrows  at  the first  cutter,  with  considerable  force  and  precision.  Lieutenant  Heath- cote,  a  seaman,  and  Dr.  Mouat's  jemadar  were  struck  with  arrows
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  238
in  the  first  cutter,  and  one  man  was  wounded  in  the  same  manner  in the  second  cutter,  which  had  come  up  by  this  time.  As  the  savages were  well  supplied  with  arrows,  and  were  ahout,  to  repeat  their  aggres- sion, the  Committee  opened  fire  upon  them.  Three  of  them  were shot  dead,  and  the  rest  abandoned  their  canoes  to  swim  to  the  shore, which  the  greater  number  of  them  were  seen  to  reach  in  safety.  The moment  the  natives  were  unable  to  continue  the  action,  the  cutter's crew  were  oidered  to  cease  firing,  and  no  pursuit  was  attempted,  as the  savages  were  considered  to  have  been  sufficiently  punished  for their  aggression.
99.  One  of  the  natives,  when   in  the  water,   seized  a  strap  thrown to  him  from  the  second  cutter,  and  was   taken  on    board.     The  Com- mittee deliberated   anxiously  as  to  the  disposal  of  this  man,   whether to  release,  or  to  carry  him  to   Calcutta.     They  ultimately  decided  on the  "latter  course  as   the  one   required  by  the  interests   of  humanity, although  attended  with  hardship   to  the  individual,    until  he   can  be instructed  sufficiently  to  know  the   reasons  which  led   to  his  removal from  his  country  and  kindred.
100.  In  the  future  occupation  of  the  Andamans,  it  is  of  the  utmost importance  to  the  wretched  outcasts   occupying   its  shores,    that    the means  of  communicating  with  them  should  exist.     They  are  at  pre- sent either  so  savage  or  so  ignorant  as   to   regard   all   new-comers  as enemies,  to  resist  all  attempts  at   intercourse   as  aggressions,   and  to put  themselves  out  of  the  pale  of  humanity  by  the  violence  and  mis- trust of  their   proceedings.     The   contact   with  civilization   in   such circumstances  can  only  end  in  their  destruction,  whereas  if  they   can be  persuaded  that  no  harm  is  intended  to  them,  it  is  not  visionary  to hope  that  the  means  of  reclaiming  and  restoring  them   to  a   place  in the  human  family,  which,  they  do  rot  now  occupy,  may  be  found.
101.  It  may   also  be   the  means  of    saving  the  lives  of  those  who may  hereafter  be  cast  away  on  their  dreaded  and   inhospitable  shores, should  the  savages  be  taught,  that  to  treat  them  kindly  will  be  to  be rewarded,  while  murder  and  violence  will  meet  with  the  most  certain, swift,  and  stern  punishment.
102.  To   ascertain  their  manners   and  customs,  and  to  establish
234  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
their  identity  with  any  existing  portion  of  the  Negro  race,  to  which they  clearly  belong,  would  solve  the  mystery  of  ages,  and  lead  to  a knowledge  of  the  probable  manner  in  which  Asiatic  Islands  came  to be  occupied  by  an  African  people.
103.  To  gain  some  knowledge  of  recent  shipwrecks  and  what  has become  of  the  unfortunate  castaways  is  also  of  the  deepest  interest, and  may  lead  to  the  rescue  of  any  unfortunate  individuals  who  may b«  in  captivity  among  them,  should  such  exist.  This  is  by  no  means improbable,  as  we  have  every  reason  to  doubt  that  the  savages  are cannibals,  and  found  evidence  that  shipwrecks  are  not  uncommon  on these  islands.
lOi.  All  these  objects  can  only  be  accomplished  through  the instrumentality  of  a  native  of  the  islands,  old  enough  to  be  acquain- ted with  their  manners,  customs,  language,  and  traditions,  if  any exist,  and  not  too  old  to  be  beyond  the  reach  of  instruction.  To himself,  once  the  shock  of  the  severance  of  his  ties  and  associations  is past,  the  end  can  only  be  one  of  advantage,  in  rescuing  him  from  a precarious  existence  in  the  lowest  scale  of  humanity,  and  in  rendering him  the  instrument  of  much  probable  future  good  to  his  own  race.
105.  For  these  reasons,  the  Committee  venture  earnestly  to  hope that  their  proceedings   will   meet  with    the   approval  of  the   Eight Hon'ble  the  Governor  General   of  India  in   Council,   and   that   steps will  be  taken  to  train  and  educate  the  individual  referred  to,  so  as  to gain  a  knowledge  of  his   language,   and   to   send   him  back  to  the Andamans  to  be  the  means  of  communication  between  the  Settlement and  the  inhabitants.
106.  The  identity   in  the   construction  of   their   huts  and  imple- ments of  all  kinds,  in  the  making  and   management  of  their  canoes, and  in  their  habitst  so  far  as  they  could  be  learnt  from   the  little  the Committee  were  able  to  see  of  them,   lead  the  Committee  to  believe that  the  same  tribe  occupy  the  whole  of  the  Group  examined.
107.  They  are  evidently   dwarf   Negroes,  with  all  the  physical characters  of  Africans.     They  appear  not  to  exceed  five  feet  in  height, to  be  strong  and  tolerably  well   built,  and  all  those  we  saw  were  in good  condition.
WIT1I  THE  ANDAMANKSE.  £35
108.  They  frequent  reefs  and  rocks  where  shell-fish  exist  in  abun- dance and  are  easily  caught.     When  they  have  exhausted  one  place> they  migrate  to  another.    At  Port   Campbell,  we  found  one  village recently  abandoned,  and  another  in  course  of  construction,  the  palms covering  the  huts  being  green  and  fresh.     The  latter  was  within  a mile  of  the  former.
109.  In  no  place  did  we  discover  the  smallest  attempt  to  cultivate the  soil,  or  to  penetrate   to   the  interior.     Tlie    few   paths  we  found were   short   in   extent  and   led  to  water-courses;  beyond   them  the primeval  forest  was  untouched  and  untrodden  by  man.
110.  Their  huts  are  rude  and   open  on   all  sides.     In  general,  they consist  of  four  posts,  the  two   anterior   being  much  higher   than  the two  posterior  ones,  which  are  close  to  the  ground.     The  former  varies from  three  or  four  to  about  ten  feet  in  height.     The  thatch  generally consisted  of  a  few  palm  leaves  lightly  bound  together  and  overlapping each  other.
111.  In  every  village  there  were  one  or  two  huts  of  larger  dimen- sions, some  twelve  or  fourteen  feet  square,    with   well  thatched  roofs plaited  on  a  rattan  frame.
112.  One  quadrangular  hut  was   seen   supported  on  corner  posts, with  the  eaves  of  the  thatch  within   a  foot  and  a  half  of  the  ground. Most  of  the  others   were   quite   open   in   front  and  at  the  sides,    the rear  being  protected  by  the  thatch  reaching  nearly  to  the  ground.
113.  In  many  of  the  huts,  bunches  of  the  skulls  of  fish,    pigs,  and tortoises  were  hung  up.     The   skulls  were  variously  marked  of  red colour.     Near  all  the  huts  were  found  an  abundance  of  empty  shells.
114.  The  canoes  are   scooped  out  of   the  trunks   of  trees  and  vary considerably  in  size.     The  process  must  be  extremely  tedious,  as  it  is performed  by  a  dwarf  adze  with  a   wooden  head,   in  which    a   small, sharp,   semi-circular   blade   of   iron   beaten  out,   is   placed.     This   is sharpened  on  a  stone,  which  was  invariably  found  with  it.     The  canoes are  propelled  by  bamboo  poles  and  paddles,  the  latter  consisting  of  a handle  about  three  feet  and  a  half   long,   with  a  small   blade,   either pointed  or  circular  at  the  end.     Many  of  them   were  ornamented    by
cross  lines  of  red  paint.
Sal
236  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATION-
115.  The  canoes  which  put  to   sea  are   armed  with   an    outrigger, very  similar  to  that  used   by  the  Cingalese.
116.  In  the  canoes  were  found  small  hand-nets,   bows  and  arrows, nets  containing  empty   shells,   old   nails,   bits   of  stone}  and  similar rubbish.
117.  One  large  strong   net,  with   immense  meshes,   and   singular floats,  was  taken.     It  appears  to   be  used  for  catching   turtle,  as   it must  be  too  large  for  any  fish  under  the  size  of  a  shark,  and  not  strong enough  to  capture  the  latter.     The  floats  are  pieces  of  wood,  four  feet in  length,  with  a  sheaf  of    shaviugs  at   the  end.     The  net  had  stones attached  to  it  as  weights.
118.  Their  weapons   consist   of  bows   and   arrows,    of  two   kinds. One  form  of  bow  is  flat  arid  gracefully  formed,  the   other  much stronger  and  rougher.
119.  Photographs  of  all  these   will  be   submitted,  as  soon   as  they can  be  taken.
120.  The  arrows  are  of  several  kinds,  and  generally  about  four  feet in  length.     Some  of  them  are  of  simple,  hard  pointed  wood  let  into  a straight  reed.     Others  are  pointed  with   iron  and  barbed.     Some   of the   barbed  heads  are   attached   to  the  reed  by   a  strong  cord   waxed and  tied  to  both  the  head  and  shaft  of  the  arrow.
121.  In  some  of  the  huts  were  found  what  appear  to  be  shields  of hard  red  wood,  of  considerable  size,  but  of  which  the  probable   use  is not  well  determined.
122.  They  manufacture  a  tough  cord  from  a  strong  fibrous  bark> and  scoop  out  blocks   of  wood   for   vessels   to   contain   fresh  water. The  usual  drinking  cup  is  an  emptynautilus  shell.
123.  They  have  small  wicker  baskets,   which  are   fastened    to  the waist  when  they  are  fishing,  by  a  coil  of  strong   coarse   flat  cord,   of which  three  or  four  folds  were  seen  round  their   bodies.     To  the   end is  attached  a  piece  of  iron  beaten  into  the  form  of  a  knife  blade,  prob- ably to  open  shells.
124.  The  only  vegetable  food  found  in  their   canoes  or  habitations was  the  fruit  of  the   mangrove,   a   large  leguminous  bean,  and   some wild  spinach.    The  former  is  sliced  in  shreds,  and  placed  to  soak  in
WITH  THE  ANDAMANKSK.  237
fresh  water   in  a  small,  closely  woven    net.     \Ve    did   not  ascertain M'hether  they  are  eaten  cooked  or  raw.
125.  The  inhabitants  seen  hy   us   were  all   entirely  naked.     The top  of  the  head  and  the  anterior  part  of  the  chest  were   covered  by    a red  clay,  which  was   found  kept  in   large   shells.     Their   bodies  are scarred  in  lines  by  a  cutting   instrument,   being  a  savage  form  of tattooing.
126.  All  hair  is  removed  from  their  scalps   and   bodies  with    the exception  of  the  upper  lip  of  the  men,  where  a  scanty   amount   of stunted  woolly  hair  was  seen.
127.  No  indication  of  cannibalism  was  found  iu   connection  with their  dwellings,  not  a  human  bone  or  relic  of   any   description  being found,  either  of  their  own  dead,  or  of  the  bodies  of  the  people  wrecked on  their  coast.
128.  The  two  largest  villages  seen   were  on   the  southern  shore  of Old  Harbour,  the  one  containing  twenty-two,  the  other  fourteen  huts. In  general,  three  or  four  huts  were  all  that  were  found  together.
129,,  We  had  no  means  of  estimating  even  approximately  the  prob- able population  of  the  Great  Andaman,  and  from  the  migratory habits  of  the  people,  it  will  be  difficult  to  form  any  accurate  conclu- sion on  the  subject.  They  were  in  larger  numbers  on  the  western, than  on  the  eastern  coast,  so  far  as  we  could  see.
.    .  ,         130.  The   island  called   the  Great    Andaman  is
General          physical  ,
of  the  Great     about  125  miles  long,  with  a  breadth  varying  from
Andaman.  t\  •     ,  *i
five  to  sixteen  miles.
131.  Its  length  runs  North  and  South   in  the   93°  of  East  Longi- tude, and  between  the  llth  and  14th  parallels  of  North  Latitude.
132.  Strictly,  the  Great    Andaman  is  formed  by  three  islands,  dis- tinguished as  North,  Middle,  and  South.
133.  The     two   latter  are   separated   by    a   strait   averaging    a quarter  of  a  mile   in  breadth  and  extending   for  twelve  miles  North- West  and  South-East.     It   hfis     a   considerable   depth   of  water    all through,  but  the  eastern  entrance,  owing  to  the  presence  of  a  bar,  has only  a  depth  of  one  and  a  half  fathoms.    The  two  former  are   sepa- rated by  a   labyrinth  of  narrow   channels  meandering   through   the
238  A  HISTOKY  OF  OUK  RELATIONS
swamps,  but   there    is  no  distinct  passage   or   strait,  of  which  the existence  is  indicated  as  probahle  in  Lieutenant  Blair's  chart.
134.  Looking  at  the  Great  Andaman  as  one  island,  a   section   of it  from  east  to  west  would  exhibit  something  of  this  form  :  —
The  highest  land  wherever  seen  is  on  the  eastern,   and   gradually descends  towards  its  western  shore.
135.  The  water-shed  is,  therefore,  chiefly  towards  the   west,  and consequently  it  is  oh  tbat  side  of  the  island  that  marshy  localities  will most  probably  abound.
136.  A  section  of  the  island  from  North  to  South  shows  the  exist- ence of   several  elevated  ridges  which  have  all  one  characteristic  in common,  their  highest  point  is  towards  the  North  and  they  gradually decrease  in  height  to  the  South,  until   they  terminate  either  in  low marsh  land  as  at  Andaman  Strait,  or  in  undulating  land  of  moderate elevation  as  to  the  south  of  Old  Port  Cornwallis.
137.  Rutland  Island,  which  in  fact  might   be  looked  on  as  a  con- tinuation of  the  Great  Andaman,  has  also  its  high  mountains  whicb gradually  sink  towards  the  South  into  a  succession  of  low  undulating hills.
138.  To  the  North  of  Port    Cornwallis   the  island  is  formed  of  a series  of  low  hills,  having  the  usual  outline   common   to  trap   forma- tions.
139.  Immediately  to  the  South  from  that  port,  the  land  rises  until about  seven  miles  to  the  South,  it  reaches  its  highest  elevation  in  the Saddle  Mountain,  the  height  of  which  is    2,400  feet.     It  then  gradu- ally decreases  for  the  next  14  miles,  when  the  hills  terminate  and  there is  some  extent  of  land  similar   in  character  to  the  Sunderbunds,  low swamps  covered  with  mangroves,  and   intersected   by   narrow   canal- like  passages,  filled  or  half  empty  as  the  tide  rises  and  falls.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANBSE.  £39
140.  A  few  miles  to  the  South,  the  land  again  reaches  a  consi- derable elevation  and  retains  it  for  18  miles,  when  it  resumes  a  lower character,  but  we  are  unable  to  say  to  what  extent,  as  this  portion  of the  coast  opposite  the  Archipelago  was  not  examined.
141.  At  the  eastern  entrance   of  Middle  Strait,   hills  are  again prominent,  become  more  so  a  few  miles  to  the  South,  pass  Old  Har- bour, and  terminate  at  Macpherson's  Straits.
142.  Of  the  Geology  of  the  island   we   have   not   had   sufficient opportunities  to  warrant  any  detailed  description.
143.  Specimens  of  rocks  have  been  collected   from  every  locality where  we  landed,  but  it  will  require  some  time,  and  the  assistance  of a  practical  geologist  to  arrange  and  classify  them.
144.  In  an  economical  point  of  view,   the  discovery  of  extensive beds  of  silicious  sandstone,  and  limestone,  is  important,  as  affording  a supply  of  materials  necessary  for  a  settlement.
145.  The    hills  throughout  the  Island   are   covered  from   their summit  to  their  base  with  luxuriant  vegetation,  and  will  supply  any amount  of  material  for   building  and  other   purposes.     They   include Bamboos,  Palms,  and  Rattans,  as  well  as  timber  trees.
146.  On  the  East  coast  as  far  South  as  Long   Island,  there  is  a great  deficiency  of  water;  we  noticed  few  running  streams.
147.  It  is  probably  in  consequence  of  this,  that  there  are  so  few birds  in  that  part  of  the  island.
14S.  At  Old  Port  Cornwallis  where  water  abounds,  there  were numerous  birds,  but  our  occupations  did  not  permit  of  any  collection worthy  of  note  being  made.
149.  The  only  Mammal  whose  existence   we  ascertained  was  the Pig,  their  skulls  being  found  suspended  in  the  huts  of  the  savages.
150.  Throughout  the  expedition  we  found  the  "  General  chart  of _.         , .  .  .        the  Andamans  "  by   Lieutenant   Archibald    Blair
Hydrographical  fea- tures of     the   Great     (a  manuscript  copy  of  which  was   obtained    from
the  Surveyor  General's  Office  prior  to  leaving Calcutta)  of  the  greatest  use.  It  has  always  proved  a  safe  and  cer- tain guide  to  sill  those  parts  of  the  islands  which  had  been  examined by  him  in  detail,  and  it  was  only  in  those  spots  where  his  survey  has
A  HISTJRY  OP  OUR  UELATION'S
been  less  minute  that  we  have  found  it  to  be  at  all  defective,  and  all these  localities  have  been  found  to  be  of  such  a  nature  as  to  be  of  no practical  utility,  either  in  themselves,  or  from  being  beset  with dangers  which  renders  them  so.  Thus  we  found  the  strait  which connects  Port  Andaman  with  Stewart's  Sound  to  be  impassable  even for  a  boat  at  low  water,  and  the  western  const  in  the  parallel  of  Old Port  Cornwallls  is  so  deeply  fringed  with  coral  as  to  render  the  fine harbour,  which  was  there  discovered,  and  has  been  before  alluded  to, all  but  useless.
151.  Bat  those  places  which  have  been   attentively   surveyed,   as evinced  by  the  fullness  of  the  detail  represented  on  the  chart,  such  as Old  and  New  Port  Cornwallis,  Rutland  Island,  Port  Campbell,   etc., we  found  to  be  in  exactly  the  same   condition  as  delineated  by  Blair nearly  70  years  ago.     This  was  particularly  observable  in  the  Middle Strait,   where  islets  of  only   50  yards   in   length  appear  in  precisely the  same  state,  both  as  to  sizes  elevation,    and  position,  as  that  repre- sented by  the  first  surveyor.     Tlie  very  vegetation  upon  them   would give  the  idea  of  its  being  the  growth   of  only  the  last  Monsoon,   and the  only  signs  of  age  are  the  dead  stems  and  branches  of  trees  standing amongst  the  low  mangrove,  stunted  by  want  of  the  free  access  of  the waters  of  the  ocean.
152.  The  permanency  of  the  features  of  this  passage  is  no  doubt attributable  in  the  first  place  to  the  hard   sandstone  formation,  which is  prevalent  in  the  neighbourhood  and  which  forms  the  foundation  of these  islets,  as   well  as  of   the  points   which  govern  the  windings  of the  strait  ;  further,  the  tides  are  week  and  carry   no   silt    with   them and  the  drainage  is    merely  that  of   the  adjacent   hills,   which  would amount  in   the  aggregate  to   50   square  miles,   and   this  being  distri- buted along  the  whole  length  of  the  Strait,   is  far  too  small  to  effect
it.
153.  The  whole  of  the  shores  of  the  Andamans  are  skirted  by  con-
tinuous  coral  reefs.  Coral  abounds  in  every  bay  and  is  strewn  in broken  pieces  on  every  beach.  These  reefs  are  far  more  extensive, and  form  dangers  to  a  far  greater  distance  from  the  land  on  the  West side  than  on  the  East,  depths  of  100  fathoms  being  found  in  many
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
places  on  the  eastern  shore  within  three  miles  of  the  coast,  and  gene- rally at  &  distance  of  five  miles,  whereas  on  the  western  shore  the reefs  extend  and  form  dangerous  patches  at  a  distance  of  twenty and  twenty-five  miles  from  the  land,  a  fact  the  probability  of  which is  sufficiently  indicated  by  the  geological  feature  of  the  Islands,  the general  dip  of  the  stratified  rocks  being  to  the  eastward  and  at  a high  angle,  sometimes  as  much  as  75°.
154.  We  were  unable  to  make  any  observation  on   the  growth  of the  coral,  both,  on  account  of  the  chart   being  on   too  small  a  scale  for such  a  purpose,  and  our  own  time  not  permitting.
155.  Navigation  amongst  coral  must  at  all  times  be  hazardous,  and the  most  minute  survey  may  fail  to  detect  some  of  the  isolated  rocks formed  by  the  insect,  of  the  approach  to  which  no  warning  is  to  be found.    The  banks  which  exist  so  far  to  the   westward  must  always prove  an  impediment  to  the  prosperity  of  a  colony  established  at  Inter- view Island,  or  in  any  part  of  the  western  coast.
156.  The   hydrographical  features  of  the  several  places  visited have  so  direct  a  bearing  on  the  point   we  are   called  upon  to  decide, that  it  has  been  thought   better  to  include  them  in  the  general description  of  those  localities  where  they  will  be  found.
157.  We  are  happy  to  have   it  in  our  power  to  report  that,  not-
withstanding  the  constant  exposure  of  our  party
Absence  of  sickness.       .  .  .
m  boats,  and  in  penetrating  primeval  jungle  never before  traversed,  not  a  single  case  of  sickness  occurred  from  beginning to  end.
We  have,  etc.,
(Sd.)     FEED.  J.  MOTJAT,  M.D.,  £  resident, Surgeon,  Bengal  Army.
„      GEORGE  R.  PLAYFAIB,  M.D  ,
Surgeon,  Bengal  Army.
„      J.  S.  HEATHCOTE,
Lieutenant,   I.N. 2i
242  A  HISTOKY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
No.  87,  dated  the  15th  January,  1858.
From. — C.  BEADON,  Esq.,  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  India, To — Captain  H.  MAN,  Executive  Engineer  and  Superintendent  of  Convicts at  Moulmein.
It  has  been  determined  by  the  Eight  Hon'ble  the  Governor  General in  Council  to  establish  a  penal  settlement  on  the  Andaman  Islands, for  the  reception,  in  the  first  instance,  of  convicts  sentenced  to  impri- sonment, and  to  transportation,  for  the  crimes  of  mutiny  and  rebellion and  for  other  offences  connected  therewith,  and  eventually  for  the reception  of  all  convicts  under  sentence  of  transportation,  whom,  for any  reason,  it  may  not  be  thought  expedient  to  send  to  the  Straits Settlements  or  to  the  Tenasserim  Provinces.
2.  A  Committee,  as  you  are  aware,  was  recently  appointed  to  ex- amine these  Islands,  with  a  view  to  the  selection  of  a  site  for  the above  purpose.    The   Committee  after  examining  as  carefully  and closely  as  possible  all  the  localities  in  the  coast  which  offer  facilities for  the  establishment  of  such  a  settlement,  have  reported  decisively  in favour  of  the  old  harbour  on  the  East  Coast  of  the  Great  Andaman  in North  Latitude  ll°-42'.
3.  A  copy  of  the  Committee's  report  is  forwarded  for  your  inform- ation.   The  Governor  General  in  Council,  after  attentively  consider- ing the  reasons   given  for  the   selection  of  Old  Harbour,  is   satisfied that  it  is  a  site,  if  not  the  best,  at  any  rate  admirably  adapted  for  the purpose  in  view.     It  is  the  one  chosen  as  the  place  of  a  Settlement by  Lieutenant  Blair  in  1789,  known  by   experience  to  be  salubrious, possessing  abundance  of  wood  and  water,  sheltered  from  the  monsoon, and  particularly  convenient  for  the  location,  separation,   and  manage- ment of  convicts  of  different  classes.
4.  His  Lordship  in  Council  has  determined  therefore  that  a  penal settlement  for  the  objects  above  mentioned  shall  be  established  on the  Andaman  Islands,  and  that  a  commencement  shall  be  made  at  the Old  Harbour,  which  will  hereafter   be  distinguished  by  the  name  of Port  Blair  in  honour  of  the  Officer  who  discovered  and  accurately  sur- veyed it  upwards  of  SO  years  ago,  and  by  whom  its  advantages  were foreseen  and  appreciated.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  243
5.  In  forming  the  Settlement  and  taking  the  first  steps  towards carrying  out  the  views  of  the  Government  of  India  (  to  be  presently explained  )  the  Governor  General  in   Council  is   desirous  of  availing himself  of  your  experience  in  convict  management,  and  I  am  accord- ingly directed  to  request  that  on  the  receipt  of  these  instructions  you will  prepare  to  proceed  as  soon  as  possible  in  the  Pluto  to  Port  Blair, in  order  to  make  arrangements  for  the  reception  of  the  convicts  who will  shortly  be  sent  there,  and  to  lay  down   the   details  of  a  plan  for their  location,  employment,  and  general  control.
6.  It  may  be  assumed  that  the  class  of  rebels  and  mutineers   who are  sentenced  by  the  Civil  and  Military  tribunals  to   the  secondary punishment  of  transportation,  or  to   imprisonment,   will  not   include any  of  the  worst  offenders ;   and,   therefore,  that  the  convicts   with whom  you  will  have  to  deal  in  the  first  instance,  will,  for  the  most part,  be  men  who  have  been  led  to  the  commission  of  crimes  against  the State  by  the  example  of  others,  and  not  men  of  a  desperate  or  un- manageable character.
7.  The  Governor  General  in  Council  is  therefore  inclined  to  think that  the  bulk  of  the  convicts  on  their  arrival  at  the   Settlement  may at  once  be  put  in  a  position  analogous  to  that  allowed  to  convicts  of the  third  class  in  the  Straits  Settlements,  and  that   the  best  among them  should  be  promoted  at  once  to   a  class  similar  to  the  second class  in  the  Straits,  and  employed  as  Sirdars  or  Tindals  over  the others.     Degradation  to  a  fourth  or  lower  class,   and  the  imposition of  irons,  may  probably  be  reserved  as  punishments  for  the  refractory.
8.  The  first  step  to  be  taken  however  is  the^selection  of  a  site  for the  residence  of  the  Superintendent,  for  a  barrack  to  accommodate  the guard  of  Europeans  which  it  will  be  necessary  to  entertain  there  for some  time  to  come,  for  a  store  house,  and  for  such  other  buildings  as may  be  required.    In  the  opinion  of  the  Governor  General  in  Council the  best  place  that  can  be  chosen  for  this  purpose  is  Chatham  Island in  the  centre  of  the  harbour,  and  His  Lordship  in  Council  considers that  no   time  should  be  lost  in  clearing  the  island  and  collecting materials  for  building.     Whether  the   buildings  shall  be  of  masonry or  whether  they  shall  be  of  wood,  such  as  those  commonly  used  in  the
2  i  2
24 1  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
Burmese  Provinces,  His  Lordship  in  Council  leaves  to  your  judg- ment. The  latter  is  probably  to  be  preferred  ;  and,  as  the  climate and  other  conditions  of  the  island  are  similar  to  those  of  Burmah,  it is  essential  that  all  buildings  should  be  well  raised  on  piles  or  pillars after  the  fashion  usually  adopted  by  the  Burmese.  You  will  on  no account  omit  this  precaution.  The  clearance  of  the  island  should  be performed  in  the  first  instance  by  Burmese  coolies,  either  free  or  con- vict, whom  you  can  take  with  you  from  Moulmein  for  the  purpose,  and should  be  carried  on  afterwards  by  the  mutineer  and  rebel  convicts on  their  arrival.  Until  the  island  is  cleared  and  houses  built,  the Superintendent  and  guard  must  remain  on  board  the  Pluto  in  the first  instance,  and  afterwards  in  a  guard  ship  which  will  be  provided from  hence  for  the  service.
9.  The  Governor  General  in  Council  conceives  that  eventually when  the  Island  is  cleared  and  accommodation  provided  thereon  for  the reception  of  the  Superintendent  and  his  guard,  the  main  body  of  the convicts  will  be  employed  in   clearing  and   cultivating  the  main  land contiguous,  and  that  none  will  be  permitted  to  approach   the  Island, but  the  few  who  may  be  employed  by  the  Superintendent  upon  duties which  may  make  their  presence  there  necessary.
10.  As  long  as  the  Superintendent  is  obliged  to  keep  his   head- quarters on  board  the  Pluto  or  the  guard  ship,  the  rations  for  the  con. victs  and  coolies  on  shore  should  be  served  out  over  the  ship's  side  to the  persons  appointed  to  receive  them,  and  no  mutineer  or  rebel  con- vict should  under  any  circumstances  whatever  be  permitted  to  go  on board  either  vessel.
11.  Convict  lines  should,  if  necessary,  be  established  at  first  on Chatham  Island,  and  should  consist   of   temporary  huts  to  be  con- structed by  the  Burmese  coolies  or  the  convicts  themselves,  or  of pauls  to  be  supplied  for  the  purpose.     The  lines  to  be  established  on the  main  land  should  be  huts  of  a  more  durable  character  to  be  built by  the  convicts  under  the  guidance  of  Burmese  artisans,  and  after  an uniform  plan  suitable  to  the  climate  and  country  and  approved  by  the Superintendent.     Prom  the  beginning,  whether  on   Chatham   Island or  on  the  main  land,  and  whether  in  the  construction  of  temporary
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
or  of  permanent  huts  or  houses,  you  will  pay  special  attention  to providing  a  good  drainage  fall.  There  is  no  want  of  water  at  Port Blair  ;  but  it  will  generally  have  to  be  obtained  from  wells  ;  and  the absence  of  natural  drainage  by  moving  streams  makes  it  neoessary  that this  object  should  be  kept  in  view.
12.  The  convicts  should  be  organised  in  gangs  of  a  convenient size,  each  under  the  superintendence  of  a  Tindal  appointed  from  among their  number,  and  assisted  by  a  convict  peon  or  two.    The  duty  of  the Tindal  would  be  to  see  that  the  convicts  under  him  perform  the  daily task  allotted  to  them,  to  receive  the   daily  rations  and  regulate  the mess,  to  bring  to  the  notice  of  the  Superintendent  the  good  or  ill conduct  of  the  several  convicts  composing  his  gang,  and  generally  to be  responsible  for  their  behaviour.     In  forming  the  gangs,  men  of  the same  religion  may,  as  far  as  shall  be  otherwise  convenient,  be  brought together;   but  a   gang  once  formed  must  invariably  mess  together, and  no  objection  to  obey  orders  on  the  ground  of  caste   is  to  be admitted.
13.  The  Superintendent  should  never  leave  the  guard  ship  to  go  on shore  without  being  accompanied  by  a  sufficient  guard.     While  the convicts  are  employed  upon  Chatham  Island  they  should  not  have  any weapons  in  their  possession  but  those  which  they  use  in  clearing  the jungle.    When  they  are  located  in  the  main  land,  it  may  be  necessary to  arm  a  limited  number  of  them  with  muskets  to  keep  off  the savages.
14.  It  is  not  the  intention  of  the   Governor  General  in  Council  to propose  that  you  should  remain  for  any  length  of  time  in  Port  Blair. His  Lordship  in  Council  wishes  you  carefully  to  select  an  officer,  in or  out  of  the  service  of  Government,  in  whom  you  can  entirely  confide, and  to  nominate  him  as  Superintendent  of  the  Settlement  for  the  ap- proval of  the  Government.     With  the  assistance  of  this  officer  you are  requested  to  organise  the  expedition  for  the  purpose   of  establish- ing the  Settlement,  to  entertain  and  arm  a  sufficient  guard  probably  of European  sailors  trained  to  the  use  of  fire-arms,  to  collect  all  the tools  and  materials  you  may  think  necessary  for  commencing  operations, to  lay  in  supplies  of  rice,  wheat,  ghee,  salt,  drugs,   and  other  neces-
246  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
saries*   sufficient  for  the  supply  of  1,000  convicts  for  three  months,
*  Firewood  may  be    and  to    engage  as    many  Burmese  coolies  (free  or
obtained  in  abundance    convict)  as  you  may  think  neccsary  to  enable  vou
on   tie   spot.     Tobacco         . .  .
should  be   prohibited,     vigorously  to  commence  and  make  good  progress  in
except  as    a    medicine.        ,  /->i     J.T  T  i       j  i  .L-
Seeds  and    live-stock     clearing   Chatham   Island  and  erecting  temporary
should  be  provided.  Uneg    before    the    prisoners    fcegin    to    arrive   from
India.  If  the  Pinto  is  not  sufficiently  large  to  accommodate  the  party or  to  convey  all  the  stores,  you  can  obtain  from  the  Commissioner,  or hire,  a  small  sailing  vessel  for  the  purpose.  A  medical  officer  should accompany  the  expedition,  and  a  native  doctor  to  attend  on  the convicts.
15.  After  you  have  put  matters  fairly  in  train,  and  thoroughly  in- structed the  Superintendent  in  the  system  you  determine  to  introduce, you  will  be  at  liberty  to  return  to  your  duties  at  Moulmein  and  there- after visit  the  Settlement  at  intervals  :  but  upon  this  point  you  will receive  instructions  hereafter.     The  Superintendent  will  continue  for the  present  entirely  under  your  authority  and  control.
16.  The  Commissioner  will  be  instructed  to  place  the  Pluto  at  your disposal  for  this  service  and  to  give  you  every  aid  in  his  power  towards the  furtherance  of  the  important  object  in  view.     It  is  of  the  greatest moment  that  the  expedition  should  proceed  without  delay  as  218  con- vict mutineers  from  the  Punjab  will  shortly  leave  Karachi  in  vessels which  have  been  directed   to  proceed  to   Port  Blair  and  will  probably be  there  in  a  month  or  six  weeks  hence.
17.  You  are  requested  to  submit  without  delay  a  sketch  of  the  plan you  propose  to  adopt  and  of  the  strength  and  cost  of  the  establishment which  you  think  it  necessary  to  entertain.     You  will  also  report  to  the Public  Works  Department  the  arrangement  you  make  for  the  conduct of  your  other  duties  during  your  temporary  absence  from  Moulmein. While  you  are  employed  on  this   special  undertaking,  the  Governor General  in  Council  will  allow   you  E300    a   month   as  deputation   in addition  to  your  present  pay  and  allowances.
18.  A  more  elaborate  expression  of  your  views   will  be  expected by  the  Governor  General  in   Council  immediately    after  your  first return  from  the  Settlement.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  217
19.  There  remains  one  important  point  upon    which,  although  it does  not  call  for  immediate  action,  it  is  necessary  that  you  should  be in  possession  of  the  views  of  the  Governor  General  in  Council.
20.  Many  hundred  Mutineers  and  Rebels  will  before  long  be  estab- lished at  Port  Blair.     The  congregation  of  so  large  a  body  of  male  con- victs,  not  held  under  the  strict  discipline  which  can  be   enforced   only within  prison  walls,  is  a  gigantic  evil.     It  is  true  that  it  is  one  which in  some  places  Las  been  submitted  to  from  necessities  arising  out  of  the position  or  nature  of  the  Penal  Establishment,  of  the  character  of  the convicts,  or  other  causes.     But  this  is  not  the  case  in  the  Andaman Islands.     There  is  plenty  of  room  for  the  wives  and  families   of  the prisoners.    There  is  no  free  community  to  whom  their  presence  can  be objectionable.     The  character  of  very  many  of  the  convicts  them- selves will  not  be  that  of  morally  degraded  criminals,  but  of  grievous political  offenders.     There  is  no  reason  why  the  same  wise  consider- ation Which  requires  that  in  the  case  of  free  emigrants  to  our  colonies, the  colony  should  receive  a  certain  proportion  of  women  as  well  as men,  should  not  be  kept  in  view  in  the  present  instance.     You  will, therefore,  understand  it  to  be  the  desire  of  the  Governor  General  in Council  that  eventually  the  wives  and  children  of  some  of  the  muti- neers should  follow  them  from  India.
21.  That  they  would  do  so  at  once,  even  if  invited,  is  not  likely; nor  is  it  likely  that  the  convicts  would  wish  to  be  accompanied  by  them across  the  "black  water":  and  the  Governor  General  in  Council  has  no intention  of  removing  any  of  them  forcibly  at  present.    But  it  is  very probable  that  with  time,  and  if  the  permission  to  be  joined  by  their wives  and  families  be  made  a  reward  to  prisoners  for  good  behaviour, and  limited  to  a  certain  number,  and  if  those  who  deserve  the  indul- gence be  allowed  to  communicate  with  their  homes,  the  repugnance may  on  each  side  cease  to  be  felt.
22.  You  will  then  keep  this  object  before  you  as  an  ultimate  aim of  the  Government ;  not  requiring  any  immediate  measures,  but  to  be worked  out  according  to   your  judgment  and  the  experience  of  those with  whom  you  will  have  to  deal.
248  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
No.  88,  dated  the  15th  January  1858. From — C.  BEADON,  Esq.,  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  India,
To — Captain  H.  MAN,  Executive  Engineer   and  Superintendent  of   Con- victs at  Moulmein.
In  continuation  of  my  letter  No.  87  of  this  date,  I  am  directed to  request  that  on  your  arrival  at  Port  Blair  you  will  hoist  the  British Flag  and  take  formal  possession  of  the  group  of  Islands  called  the Andaman  Islands,  consisting  of  the  Great  and  Little  Andamans  and all  the  Islands  adjacent  thereto,  in  the  name  of  Her  Majesty  the Queen  and  the  East  India  Company.
2.  Although  it  is  certain  that  formal  possession  of  these  islands was    taken  by    the    British    Government  in   1789,   and  that  the sovereignty  of  them  is  legally  vested  in  the  East  India  Company  in trust  for  the  British  Crown,  yet  as  they  were  deserted  in  1796,  and have   been   only    nominally    in  possession  of  the  Government  ever eince,  it  is  desirable,  as  a  measure  of  precaution  and  to  avoid   the possibility  of  future  doubt,  that  the  right  should  be  again  asserted  and recorded.
3.  I  am  also  directed  to  state  that  the  Governor  General  in  Coun- cil has  been  pleased  to  vest  you  with  full  judicial  and  executive authority  throughout  the  Andaman  Islands,  and  to  appoint  you  to  be a  Commissioner  therein  under  Acts  No.  XIV  and  XVII  of  1857  for the  trial  of  all  persons  charged  with   having   committed  within   the said  Islands  any  crime  against  the  State,  or  any  heinous  crime  what- ever.
Attract  from  a  Despatch  from  the  Eon'tle  the  Court  of  Directors   in,  the  Political Department,  No.  19  of  1858,  dated  the  18th  May.
OUR  GOVERNOR  GENERAL  OF  INDIA  IN  COUNCIL.
1.  We    now     reply     to
Foreign  Letter,  dated  8th    April,  No.  24,  1857.  ,,    ,
„    2nd  May,  33, 1857.         your  several  letters  noted  in
I!         ;;      ;;    It  £$«**,       fs,  llll:        the  margin,  relating  to  the
Ju!!cial  ;;   ;;  SaiSSS:      l:\lll:     survey  of  the  Andaman
Islands.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  249
2.  On  the  receipt  of  our  letter  of  the  1st  of  October  1856,   direct- ing you  to  despatch,  at  your  earliest  convenience,  a  steamer  with  a surveying  party  under  competent  directions  for  the  exploration  of  the islands,  the  season  had  advanced  too  far  to  admit  of  preparations   be- ing made  for  the  commencement  of  the  proposed  survey  (there  being no  steamer  then  available  for  the  purpose),  but  in  the  early  part  of the  following  cold  season  the  importance  of  the  Andaman  Islands,  as a  convenient  place  for  the  reception  of  convicts,  having,  in  the  mean- while, been  greatly  enhanced  by  the  mutiny  in  the  Bengal  Army, you  nominated  on  the  20th  of  November  last,  a  Committee  consisting of  Doctors  Mouat  and  Playfair  of  the  Bengal  Medical  Establishment, and  Lieutenant  J.  A.  Heathcote  of  the  Indian  Navy,  "  to  examine  the shores  of  the  Andaman    Group  of   Islands,  and  select  the  best  site, which  could  be  found  there,  for  the  establishment  of  a  penal  settle- ment."
3.  In  accordance   with  instructions  from  your  Government,  the Committee  proceeded  to  Moulmein  on  the  23rd  of  November,  on  board the  Steam  Frigate  Semiramis,  and  on  the  8th  of  December  they  again embarked  at  that  place  on  board   the   Pluto,   taking  with  them   12 Burmese  convicts  "  accustomed  to  forests  "  and  a  guard  of  three  con- vict peons  ;  besides  an  officer  and  twenty  European  seamen  from  the crew  of  the  Semiratnis,  to  protect  the  exploring  parties.
4.  On  the  llth  of  December,  the  I'luto  anchored  in  Port  Corn- waDis,  off  the  northern  coast  of   Chatham   Island,  where   a   British Settlement  had   existed  for  some  years  towards  the  close  of  the  last century,  and  had  been  finally  abandoned  in  1796,  on  account  of   its extreme  unhealthiness.     The  Committee  were  anxious,  as  a  prelimi- nary to  their  investigations,  to  ascertain  the  causes  of  this  reputed  in- salubrity, and  they  were  not  long  left  in  doubt  regarding  them.     "It appears,"  say  the  Committee,  '•  to  have  been  ill  selected  as  a  site  for a  settlement,  two-thirds  of  its  own  shore  being  fringed  with  a  dense belt  of  mangrove,  and  the  prevailing  winds   during   the  greater  part of  the  year,  at  its  most   unhealthy  season,  blowing   over   the  swamp surrounding  the  island.     Conditions  more  certainly  calculated  to  secure
the  largest  measure  of  unhealthiness,  it  would  be  difficult  to  find."
8x
250
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
6.  Having  ascertained  tbis  fact,  the  Committee  proceeded  to  make a  general  exploration  of  the  Andaman  Group,  and  eventually  returned to  Old  Harbour,  whicb,  we  apprehend,  is  on  the   south-eastern   coast of  the  southernmost  of  the  three  islands  known  as  the  Great  Andaman. Tbis  was  tbe  first  place  fixed  upon  for  the  original   settlement,   and successfully   maintained   by   Lieutenant   Blair,  until,  for  the  sake  of better  anchorage,  the  colony  was  removed  to  Port  Cornwallis,  which lies  to  the  north-east  of  the  islands.     No  inconvenience  on  the  score of  unhealthiness  had  been  experienced  by  our  first  settlers  in  the more  southern  locality,  and  when  the  Committee  proceeded  to  ex- amine it,  they  found  that   it  fulfilled  many   of   the   most  important conditions  of  a  healthy  place  of  residence.    They  accordingly  recorded a  strong  opinion  in  its  favour.     "  The  Committee,"  they  wrote,  "  are not  aware  of  any  physical  indications  by  which  the  healthiness  of  an uncleared  locality  can  be  absolutely  predicated,  but  so  far  as  ordinary experience  can  be  accepted  as  a  safe  guide,  Old  Harbour  seems  to afford  fair  promise  of  proving  as.  healthy  as  any   locality  similarly situated  in  a  tropical  region.     Its  means  of  drainage  are  ample  and most  efficient,  the  removal  of  all  effete  matter  beyond  the  reach  of causing  mischief  will  be  easy,  and  any  possible  existing  tracts  of marsh  land  do  not  lie  in  the  direction  of  the  prevailing  winds.     "We are  therefore  of  opinion  that  as  a  small  portion  of  it  (Chatham  Island) proved  continuously  healthy  during  the  time  it  was  occupied,  sixty years  since,  with  ordinary  care  in  the  construction  of  buildings  and strict  attention  to  conservancy   arrangements,  a  more   extended  and permanent  settlement  will  prove  equally  salubrious.''
6.  The  Committee  afterwards  visited  other  parts  of  the  Andaman Group,  but  they  found  no  spot  fulfilling  so  many  conditions  essential to  success,  and  they  finally  arrived   at  the   conclusion  that  "  Old Harbour  is  the  only  place  that  possesses  the  greater  number  of  the requisites  for  a  penal  settlement,  and  they  accordingly  recommend  its occupation  for  that  purpose,  in  preference  to  any  other  of  the  locali- ties visited  and  examined."
7.  The  natural  resources  of  the  proposed  locality  which  the  Com- mittee recommend  should  be  named  "  Port  Blair ' '  in  honour  of  the
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  251
intelligent  officer  whose  name  is  identified  with  our  first  efforts  to colonize  the  Andaman  Islands,  are  s-iid  to  be  considerable.  There is  an  abundance  of  good  water,  much  culturable  land,  and,  judging  by the  luxuriance  of  the  vegetation,  a  generally  fertile  soil ;  there  is  ex- cellent clay  for  the  manufacture  of  bricks,  an  inexhaustible  supply  of sandstone  for  building  purposes,  and  large  forest  trees  for  timber, circumstances  which  will  greatly  facilitate  your  operations  for  the establishment  of  the  proposed  settlement.
8.  With  regard  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  islands,  the  report  of  the Committee  bears  out,  except  in  one  particular,  the  description  given by  former  authorities.     The  exploring  parties  could  find  no  trace  of cannibalism,  but  the  inhabitants  are  represented  as  of  an  exceedingly savage,  suspicious,  and  implacable  character,  resenting  all  our  efforts at  intercourse,  and  inviting  hostilities  whenever  our  people  approached them.     The  proceedings  of  the  expedition  towards  these  poor  people were  distinguished  by  the  greatest  forbearance  and  humanity;    but the  aggressiveness  of  the  savages  was  such  that  collision  could  not  be altogether  avoided,  and  in  one  affray  invited  by  the  natives,  three  of their  number  were  killed,  and  one  prisoner  was  taken  and  subsequently carried  to  Calcutta,  with  the  view  of  educating  him,  and  making  him a  medium  of  communication  with  the  natives,  by  means  of  which  they might  be  taught  that  our  intentions  towards  the  people  of  the  islands are  of  the  most  friendly  character.     The  man  however  soon  sickened in  Bengal,  and  you  were  compelled  to  send  him  back  to  his  native island,  but  not  without  the  hope  that  by  furnishing  him  with  a  num- ber of  useful  articles  of  peace,  as  well  as  with  certain  objects  of  savage finery,  a  favourable  impression  might  still  be  made  upon  the  minds  of these  strange  people.
9.  The  admirable  manner  in  which  Dr.   Mouat  and  his  associates in  the  Committee  of  exploration  performed  the  duties  entrusted  to them,  is  sufficient  proof  of  the  wisdom  of  the  selection.     They  evinced great   intelligence   and   sound  discretion   in   the  prosecution  of  their investigations;   and   in    their    dealings  with   the    savage  people    of the  island,  a  laudable  humanity  and  forbearance.     Their  report  is  ex- tremely curious  and  interesting  ;  and  we  do  not  doubt  that  you  will
2K2
252
A  HISTORY  OF  OTTR  RELATIONS
cause  it  to  be  included  in  the  published  selections  from  the  records  of your  Government,  taking  care  to  illustrate  it  with  an  intelligible  map> the  want  of  which  at  present  very  much  impairs  the  value  of  the Eeport.
10.  This  report  having  been  taken  into  the  consideration  of  your Government,  you  were  of  opinion  that  a  convict  settlement  might  be advantageously  established   at   Port  Blair.      You,  therefore,  directed Captain  Man,  the  Executive  Engineer  and  Superintendent  of  Convicts at  Moulmein,  to  proceed  to  hoist  the  British  Flag,  and  to  take  formal possession  of  the  group   of  Islands,  called  the  Andaman  Islands,  con- sisting of  the  Great  and  Little  Andamans,  and  all  the  Islands  adjacent thereto,  in  the  name  of  Her   Majesty  the  Queen,  and  the  East  India Company ;  and  you  made  arrangements  for  a  party  of  convicts,  mostly sepoy  mutineers,  who  had  been  sent  down  from  the  Punjab  to  Karachi, to  be  conveyed  at  once  to  Port  Blair,  instead  of  to  the  Tenasserim  pro- vinces, as  originally  intended.
11.  On  the  subject  of  the  proposed  penal  settlement,  and  the  dis- posal of  the  convicts,  we  shall  address  you  separately  in  the  Judicial Department.     In  the  meanwhile,  we   record  our  entire  approval  of  the measures  which  you  have  adopted  to  bring  the  Andaman  Islands  again under  the  authority  of  the  British  Government.     But  we  must  express our  earnest  desire  that  all  possible  precautions  miy  be  taken  to  pro- tect the  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  the  Andamans  from  those  collisions with  the  convicts  which,  it  is  only  too  probable,  will  be  provoked  on both  sides,  and  which,  once  commenced,  are  so  likely  to  end  in  the  ex- termination of  the  weaker   race.     Such  precautions  are  rendered  the
more  indispensable  by  the  circumstances  stated  in  the  papers  before us,  that  you  purpose  to  place  arms  in  the  hands  of  some  of  the  convict sepoys,  for  purposes  of  self-defence,  a  step  which,  on  all  other  grounds, it  was  obviously  expedient  to  avoid.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  253
CHAPTER  VIII.
Opening  of  the  Settlement  by  Dr.  Walker — Trouble  given  by  the  convicts  escaping  — Severe  measures  taken — Inefficient  guard — Letter  to  Dr.  Walker — Measures  taken to  improve  discipline  and  health — Search  for  thatching  leaves  resulted  in  a  col- lision with  the  Aborigines — Guard  strengthened — Enlargement  of  the  Settlement — Dr.  Walker's  proposals  for  the  protection  of  the  Aborigines — Answers  of  the Government  of  India — Viper  Island  occupied — The  Andamanose  collect  in  largo numbers,  arid  are  hostile — Attacks  by  the  Andamanese — The  "Battle  of  Aber- deen"—  Dndhnath  Tewari's  account  of  the  Andamanese — Remarks  on  the  account  — Boorhana's  false  account  of  the  Andamanese — Boorbana's  account  of  a  wreck  ou Rutland  Island— Dr.  Walker's  resignation — Captain  Haughton  succeeds  him,
A  DETAILED  history  of  the  formation  of  our  present  Penal  Settlement on  the  Andaman  Islands  is  not  within  the  province  of  this  work,  but it  is  necessary  that  certain  facts  regarding  the  progress  of  the  Settle- ment should  be  occasionally  mentioned,  as  this  for  the  first  few  years was  intimately  connected  with  our  relations  with  the  Aborigines,  and his  policy  towards  the  Andamanese  was  one  of  the  most  difficult  duties of  the  Superintendent,  as  he  had  to  observe  the  orders  from  the  Court of  Directors  and  the  Government  of  India  that  the  Andamanese  were not  to  be  ill-treated  or  in  any  way  injured,  and  also  to  take  steps  to protect  the  convicts  at  work  in  the  jungle  from  the  attacks  of  the savages,  which  even  endangered  the  general  safety  of  the  Settlement.
Having  once  decided  on  their  policy  in  the  Andaman  Islands,  the Government  of  India  lost  no  time  in  carrying  it  out.
For  various  reasons  the  orders  contained  in  letter  No.  87  of  the 15th  January,  1S5S,  to  Captain  Man,  had  to  be  modified,  and  he  did not  appoint  the  first  Superintendent,  nor  did  he  make  periodical  visits of  inspection  to  the  Andamans  as  at  first  proposed.
On  Dr.  Mouat's  nomination,  Dr.  James  Pattison  Walker,  who  had had  much  experience  as  a  Jail  Superintendent,  and  bore  a  high  repu- tation for  his  excellent  management  of  convicts,  was  selected  to  be the  first  Superintendent  of  the  Penal  Settlement  of  Port  Blair.
He  left  Calcutta  in  the  Hon'ble  Company's  Steam  Frigate  Semi- ~ami8  on  the  4th  March,  1858,  with  200  convicts,  a  native  overseer,
254
A  HISTORY  OF  OUK  RELATIONS
two  native  doctors,  and  a  guard  of  50  Naval  Brigadesmea  under  an officer  of  the  Indian  Navy,  and  reached  Port  Blair  on  the  10th  March.
He  found  on  his  arrival  that  no  provision  for  the  convicts  existed in  Port  Blair,  and  therefore  requested  the  Commander  of  the  Hon'ble Company's  Surveying  Brig  M-utlah,  which  was  in  the  harbour,  to receive  him  on  board  and  reader  assistance  generally,  and  made  a requisition  on  the  Commander  of  the  Semiramis  for  such  provi- sions as  he  could  spare,  requesting  him  at  the  same  time  to  proceed with  all  expedition  to  the  Commissioner  of  Moulmein  and  procure provisions  for  the  Settlement.  The  Semiramis  returned  with  the provisions  on  the  20th  March,  bringing  also  Captain  Man,  who  had hoisted  the  British  Flag  at  the  Andamans  on  the  22nd  January,  1858, and  had  then  returned  to  Moulmein  to  make  further  arrangements.
Immediately  on  arrival,  the  convicts  were  set  to  clear  Chatham Island,  but,  as  it  appeared  that  the  supply  of  water  there  was  inade- quate, three  gangs  of  25  men  each  were  sent  to  clear  Ross  Island  at the  mouth  of  the  harbour.
Dr.  Walker's  remarks  on  the  jungle  are  of  interest.     He  writes : —
"The  magnitude  of  the  task  of  clearing  the  primeval  jungle  of the  Andaman  Islands  can  only  be  appreciated  by  those  who  have  wit- nessed the  nature  of  the  vegetation  and  the  difficulty  of  effecting  a clearance.  The  jungle  is  so  dense,  and  its  entanglement  by  gigantic creepers  so  complete,  as  to  render  it  impassable,  except  along  the  few pathways  used  by  the  aborigines.  The  jungle,  so  far  as  is  known,  ia continuous,  no  open  plains  having  been  observed.  Even  when  cut, often  trees  cannot  be  got  to  fall  without  great  force,  nor  brushwood when  cut  removed,  owing  to  the  intricate  binding  by  creepers  of great  strength.  There  is  great  difficulty  even  during  the  present  dry weather  in  getting  brushwood  that  has  been  several  days  felled  to burn,  and  the  largest  heaps  are  constantly  extinguished  at  night  by the  very  heavy  dews  that  fall,  drenching  everything  exposed."
Dr.  Walker  worked  with  great  energy  and  was  most  sanguine about  the  future  of  the  Settlement,  offering  to  take  almost  any  num- ber of  convicts  which  the  Government  of  India  chose  to  send.  Up  to this  time,  however  (6th  April,  1858),  he  had  neither  experienced  the
WITH  THE  AXDAMANESE.  235
effect  of  the  rainy  season,  nor  the  hostility  of  the  aborigines  who  were as  yet  holding  aloof  and  had  not  begun  to  give  any  trouble  ;  nor  did he  appreciate  the  amount  of  trouble  (by  repeated  escapes,  etc.)  the convicts  had  already  commenced  to  give,  and  afterwards  gave,  show- ing him  that  his  guard  was  insufficient  for  even  the  small  number of  convicts  he  then  had  (773  by  the  end  of  June,  1858).
His  following  remarks  on  the  convicts  and  their  behaviour  will show  that  immediately  after  their  arrival  they  commenced  to  escape, and  the  tale  of  their  delusions  and  sufferings  is  the  same  as  that  of their  fellow-prisoners  up  to  the  present  day  :—
"  Considering  all  things,  I  have  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  the general  conduct  of  the  convicts.  On  the  fourth  day  after  arrival,  con- vict No.  61,  Narain,  sentenced  on  the  31st  July  last  to  transportation for  life  for  having  excited  sedition  in  the  cantonment  of  Dinapore, where  he  was  camp  follower  in  the  bazar,  after  failing  in  an  attempt to  excite  the  convicts  with  whom  he  was  working  to  rebel,  attempted to  escape  from  Chatham  Island  by  swimming  to  the  mainland,  and nearly  succeeded.  He  was  made  to  alter  his  course  by  being  fired upon,  and  was  captured  by  a  boat's  crew.  He  was  at  once  brought to  trial,  convicted  of  sedition  and  escaping,  sentenced  to  suffer  death, and  executed.  On  the  same  day,  and  about  the  same  time,  convict 46,  Naringun  Singh,  sentenced  at  Nuddea  to  transportation  for  life, for  desertion,  committed  suicide  by  hanging  himself,  without  any known  cause,  at  a  secluded  spot  on  Ross  Island.  On  the  night  of  the 18th  March,  21  convicts  escaped  on  a  raft  from  Ross  Island  to  the main  land,  in  the  hope  of  being  able  to  reach  the  continent  of  India by  a  narrow  neck  of  land  supposed  to  connect  the  Great  Andaman  to Burma.  On  the  23rd  of  March,  eleven  convicts  escaped  from  Ross Island.  They  were  seen  several  miles  to  the  south  a  few  days  sub- sequently, and  were  iinsuccess  fully  pursued.  On  the  30th  March, one  of  the  convicts  who  escaped  on  the  18th  idem,  delivered  himself up  to  a  boat's  crew  near  Chatham  Island.  He  was  in  a  debilitated state  from  want  of  food  and  water,  and  covered  with  vermin,  that infested  even  his  ears  and  eyelids,  adhering  so  firmly  that  he  could not  remove  them.  He  stated  that  having  along  with  others  been
056  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATION  S
duped  by  a  fellow  prisoner,  who  pretended  to  have  hold  communica- tion with  one  of  the  aborigines,  who  promised  assistance  on  the  part of  a  Rajah,  they  escaped,  and  after  traversing  the  south  of  the  Great Andaman  by  the  sea  shore,  during  which  they  underwent  great  hard- ships from  want  of  food,  and  especially  fresh  water,  were  attacked  by about  one  hundred  savage  aborigines,  one  of  whose  first  arrows  in- flicted a  mortal  wound  on  the  convict  leader.  The  returned  coavict, i\t  the  time  of  escaping  into  the  jungle,  heard  the  fight  proceeding for  some  time,  and  was  under  the  impression  that  all  his  compan- ions were  massacred.  Guided  by  the  morning  and  evening  guns  he directed  his  course  towards  Port  Blair,  which  he  reached  in  three days,  during  which  he  had  not  met  with  water.  He  observed  tracks  of the  aborigines  in  his  course  hithervvards,  but  carefully  avoided  them. His  account  of  the  privations  he  suffered  has  had  a  good  effect upon  the  other  convicts,  none  of  whom  have  since  tried  to  escape "  The  fate  of  those  who  escaped  on  the  second  occasion  is  unknown, but  there  is  little  chance  of  their  escaping  death,  either  by  hunger or  by  the  hands  of  savage  aborigines,  whose  hostility  to  all  strangers is  most  unrelenting,  and  who  at  present  must  be  considered  unamen- able to  conciliation."
Mrs.  "Walker  joined  her  husband  by  the  Dalhousie  on  the  15th April,  1858,  and  Mr.  Assistant  Surgeon  Alexander  Gamack,  M.D., Mr.  Assistant  Apothecary  J.  Ringrow,  Mr.  Richardson,  Overseer,  and the  Superintendent's  Naval  Guard  of  50  men  commanded  by  Lieute- nant Templer,  I.N.,  composed  the  staff  of  the  Settlement.
With  this  small  number  of  Europeans,  with  the  heavy  rains  and. the  malaria  rising  from  the  newly  cleared  soil,  the  known  dangers from  the  insufficiently  guarded  body  of  very  dangerous  convicts,  and the  suspected  (and  much  magnified)  dangers  from  the  hostile  abori- gines, the  lives  of  Dr.  Walker  and  his  colleagues  could  not  have been  pleasant.  Cut  off  from  India,  with  only  uncertain  and  occa- sional communications,  principally  with  Moulmein,  from  whence  at first  all  supplies  were  obtained,  Dr  Walker  conceived  it  necessary  to rule  the  convicts  with  a  severity  which  was  perhaps  carried  to  excess.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  267
It  can  easily  be  understood  that,  immediately  after  the  Mutiny, officers  who  had  served  through  that  awful  time  of  trial  could  not  be expected  to  treat  a  body  of  convicted  rebels  and  mutineers  with  any undue  leniency.  Dr.  Walker,  in  sentencing  to  death  all  those  con- victs who  attempted  to  escape,  considered  that  he  was  acting  in  the best  interests  of  discipline,  but  the  fear  of  capital  punishment  even  did not  deter  the  class  of  convicts  he  had  to  deal  with  from  escaping.
They  were  almost  maddened  with  thoir  horror  of  the  Andamans and  the  tales  of  the  dreaded  savages  (for  to  be  sent  across  the  "black writer  "  was  then  the  greatest  punishment  that  could  be  inflicted  on a  Native),  and  they  cared  nothing  for  the  risk  to  their  lives,  if  by chance  they  might  succeed  in  getting  back  to  their  own  country.
Finding  that  the  desired  effect  was  not  obtained,  the  Government of  India  shortly  afterwards  directed  that  capital  punishment  was  not to  be  awarded  for  attempts  to  escape.
Both  from  the  records,  and  from  the  accounts  of  convicts  who were  then  in  Port  Blair,  I  learn  that  there  was  at  that  time  much violence  and  insubordination,  a  gang  of  500  Punjabis  giving  special trouble,  and  Dr.  Walker  was  obliged  to  resort  to  the  sternest  mea- sures.
The  customs  of  the  Tasmanian  discipline  were  enforced,  convicts were  handcuffed  together  in  pairs,  and  these  handcuffs  were  never opened.  During  working  hours  the  worst  characters  were  taken  to the  sea  beach,  and,  an  iron  bar  being  passed  through  the  fetters  of  a number  of  them,  they  were  thus  fastened  to  the  earth,  and  made  to  do what  work  they  could  in  a  sitting  posture.
This  extreme  severity,  coupled  as  it  was  even  with  good  feeding and  care,  did  not  have  any  beneficial  effect,  and  on  the  arrival  of  Cap- tain Haughton  on  the  3rd  October,  1859,  to  succeed  Dr.  Walker  as Superintendent,  the  discipline  was  much  relaxed  without  any  bad effects.
Dr.  Walker's  aim,  when  establishing  the  Settlement,  seems  to have  been  to  keep  as  good  penal  discipline  as  that  to  which  he had  been  accustomed  in  the  Agra  Jail,  and  he  never  seems  to  have realised  that,  owing  to  the  very  different  conditions,  this  was  impossible.
8 1
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
He    was   confronted   \vith    two   principal  difficulties  :  the  numerous escapes  of  the  convicts   which   his  small  and  insufficient  guard  was powerless  to  prevent,  and  the  implacable  hostility  of  the  nborigines.
To  the  convicts,  the  climate  and  general  appearance  of  the  country- must  have  come   as  a  great  shock.     They  were,  to  begin  -with,  not ordinary  jail-birds,  but  were  desperate  men,  and    Dr.  Walker's  great severity  made  them  care  little  whether  they  died  at  I/he  hands  of  the aborigines,   or  of  starvation  in  the  jungle  while  attempting  to  escape, or  whether  they  died,  as  they  expected  to,  in  Port  Blair.     Buoyed  up as  they   were  by  false  tales  about  the  Andaman  Islands  being  part  of the  mainland  of  India  or  Burma,  there  was  just   sufficient  hope  of  a successful  escape  for  them  to  risk  what  they  knew  probably  awaited them  in  the  jungle.     On  the  16th  June,  1858,  only  three  months after   the   opening   of  the  Settlement,  Dr.  Walker's  statement  of  the convicts  is  : —
Total  received      ...  ...  ...  ...         ?73
Died  in  hospital   ...  ...  ,..  ...  61
Escaped    and    not  recaptured  (probably  died  of  starvation, or  killed  by  the  savages)     ...  ...  ...          HO
Suicide  ...  ...  ...  ...  1
Hanged  for  attempting  to  escape  ...  ,..  87
Four  hundred  and  eighty-one  convicts  thus  remained  in  the  Set- tlement, of  whom  60  were  then  in  hospital,  and  this  during  the  dry and  healthy  season  before  the  commencement  of  the  rains.
Dr.  Walker  was  undoubtedly  an  energetic  and  able  officer,  and many  of  his  suggestions  regarding  the  Settlement  have  since  been  car- ried out,  but  he  wished  to  move  at  a  far  quicker  pace  than  the  Gov- ernment of  India  had  any  intention  of  doing.
At  his  request,  both  to  prevent  escapes  and  to  protect  the  Settle- ment from  the  Andamanese,  the  Naval  Guard  was  doubled,  and  a Sebundy  Corps  of  Madrasis  was  established,  which  latter,  proving  a failure,  was  disbanded.
He  was  willing  to  take  10,000  mutineers  and  rebel  convicts  during the  first  year,  and  to  continue  to  take  a  similar  number  for  the  fol- lowing five  years,  and  he  very  wisely  recommended  that  the  free
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  259
families  of  the  convicts  should  in  soma  cases  x  permitted  to  accom- pany them,  AS  this  would  tend  to  lessen  the  number  of  escapes,  but the  Settlement  was  not  sufficiently  advanced  at  that  time  for  this  to he  sanctioned.
The  Naval  Guard,  which  formed  the  entire  garrison  of  the  Settle- ment, was  drawn  from  the  Naval  Brigade  which  had  been  raised during  the  Mutiny,  and  though  containing  several  ex-men-of-war's men,  and  others  experienced  in  fighting  and  accustomed  to  discipline, was  principally  composed  of  seamen  from  the  Merchant  Service,  who had  been  hastily  drilled  and  formed  into  a  brigade,  and  who  were,  as I  have  it  from  eye-witnesses,  as  a  body,  lawless,  undisciplined,  and quite  unstated  to  such  work  us  the  protection  of  a  penal  settlement, and  still  more  unfitted  to  be  a  Frontier  Guard  by  whose  tact,  firm- ness, and  good  conduct,  our  first  favourable  impressions  were  to  be made  on  the  Andamanese,  and  permanent  friendly  relations  were  to be  subsequently  established.  As  I  shall  show  from  the  records,  it was  not  until  the  superior  officers  of  the  Settlement  took  the  direct conduct  of  Andamanese  affairs  into  their  own  hands  that  any  favour- able impression  was  made  upon  these  people.
The  following  extracts  from  correspondence  between  Dr.  Walker and  the  Government  of  India  will  be  found  of  interest,  and  show  how much  our  administration  of  the  Settlement  was  affected  by  our  rela- tions with  the  aborigines.
In  letter  No.  743,  dated  7th  May,  1858,  from  the  Secretary  to  the Government  of  India  in  the  Home  Department,  to  the  Superintendent of  Port  Blair,  Mr.  C.  Beadon  writes  : —
"  3.  It  is  not  probable  that  more  than  10,000  mutineer  and  rebel convicts  will  be  sent  to  Port  Blair  this  year,  if  at  all  :  but  enquiry has  been  made  as  to  the  number  likely  to  be  so  sentenced.  With  the result  of  this  enquiry  you  shall  be  made  acquainted  as  soon  as  pos- sible, but  the  information  procurable  on  the  latter  head  must  neces- sarily be  vague  and  uncertain.
"  4.  The  President  in  Council  regrets  to  find  from  the  documents which  accompanied  your  demi-official  letter  of  the  24th  April,  that
2i2
£60  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
the  story  of  the  convict,  who  returned  alone  from  among  those  who escaped  on  the  llth  March,  was  not  sufficient  to  deter  another  and  a more  numerous  body  from  making  a  similar  attempt.  There  can  be little  doubt  that  these  misguided  men  must  eventually  perish,  unless they  return  to  the  Settlement;  but  His  Honor  in  Council  approves  of vour  determination  not  to  give  fire-arms  again  to  the  convicts  for  the present  and  not  to  allow  them  to  work  at  Phoenix  Bay  or  elsewhere  on the  main  land,  until  you  can  send  a  number  large  enough  to  protect themselves  against  the  savages  without  such  weapons.
"  6.  You  have  no  doubt  taken  every  means  in  your  power  to  impress upon  the  convicts  the  utter  hopelessness  of  these  attempts,  and  to explain  to  them  the  impossibility  of  either  leaving  the  island  or  of escaping  the  inevitable  fate  that  awaits  them  either  from  hunger  or from  the  hostile  attacks  of  the  savages.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  some of  those  who  escaped  on  the  17th  and  22nd  of  April  may  find  their way  back  to  Port  Blair,  and  that  their  testimony,  confirming,  as  it undoubtedly  will,  that  of  the  former  return  fugitive,  will  prevent  the remainder  from  being  led  away  by^  false  stories  of  the  possibility  of either  leaving  the  island  or  of  forming  alliance  with  the  aborigines who  appear  to  be  not  less  hostile  to  the  natives  of  India  than  they  are to  Europeans."
Dr.  Walker  was  also  told  that  his  proposal  to  establish  the  Head- quarters of  the  Settlement  on  Ross  Island,  instead  of  Chatham  Island, was  approved,  and  that  a  monthly  communication  between  Calcutta and  Port  Blair  would  be  kept  up.
Mr.  Beadon  added  : —
"15.  Captain  Man  having  now  returned  to  Moulmein,  it  is  no longer  necessary  that  he  should  exercise  any  authority  in  the  Settlement. This  will  be  intimated  to  him,  and  you  will  henceforth  correspond direct  with  the  Government  of  India,  in  this  Department,  and  receive your  instructions  direct  from  the  President  in  Council.  Captain  Man will,  however,  be  requested  to  give  you  every  assistance  in  procuring whatever  supplies  you  may  be  in  want  of  from  Moulmein."
(It  is  noteworthy  that,  so  great  was  the  fear  of  the  Andamanese at  tbis  time,  no  attempt  was  made  to  explore  the  creeks  running  off
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  261
the  harbour,  and  supplies  of  thatching-leaves  were  actually  obtained from  Moulmein,  though  they  grew  in  large  numbers  by  these  creeks.)
"  19.  At  present,  the  guard  at  the  Settlement,  in  addition  to  the crews  of  the  schooner  Charlotte,  the  Pluto,  and  the  Scsosfris,  con- sists of  50  men  of  the  Indian  Navy  under  a  commissioned  officer  and a  midshipman.  I  am  directed  to  request  that  you  will  report  whether any  addition  to  the  force  is  necessary,  either  now  or  when  the  num- ber of  convicts  is  considerably  increased.  The  safety  of  the  officers of  the  establishment  and  of  the  public  buildings  must  be  placed beyond  all  risk  of  injury,  either  from  the  convicts  or  the  aborigines  of the  island.
"  The  President  in  Council  desires  me  particularly  to  caution  you against  being  lulled  in  to  a  false  sense  of  security  by  the  absence  of any  apparent  intention  or  desire  on  the  part  of  the  convicts  to  defy your  authority.  The  fire-arms  of  the  guard  should  be  always  loaded, and  it  should  be  impossible  for  any  number  of  convicts  by  a  rush  or otherwise  to  get  them  into  their  own  hands  for  a  moment ;  and  the guard  should  always  be  ready  to  act  at  once  on  the  shortest  notice.
"20.  Captain  Campbell,  of  the  Sesostris,  had  reported  the  cap- ture of  a  Malay  boat  on  the  coast  of  the  Andamans  in  the  vicinity  of Port  Blair,  with  papers  from  the  authorities  at  Penang,  authorising  it to  proceed  to  the  Andamans  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  birds'  nests and  sea  slugs.  The  Straits  authorities  will  be  desired  not  to  give  such papers  in  future,  and  to  make  it  known  that  the  resort  of  Malay boats  to  these  islands  is  prohibited,  and  that  any  found  there  will  be liable  to  detention  and  confiscation."
No.  835,  dated  26th  May,  1858. From — C.   Beadon,  Esq.,  Secretary  to  tbe  Government  of  India.
To— Dr.   J,    P.    Walker,  Superintendent  of  the  Penal  Settlement  at  Port Blair  in  the  Andamans.
Your  demi-official   communication  of  the  1st  instant,  reporting the  escape  of  large  numbers  of  convicts  from  the  Settlement,  etc.,  was
HISTORY  OF  CUE  RELATIONS
laid  by  me  before  the  Hon'ble  the  President  in  Council,  and  I  am directed  to  request  that  you  will  have  the  goodness  in  future  to  report officially  and  in  greater  detail  all  occurrences  of  this  kind.  In  regard to  the  instances  of  escape  which  you  mention,  it  should  be  explained what  the  obstacles  were  which  it  was  anticipated  would  have  pre- vented the  men  from  escaping,  or  how  they  overcame  those  obstacless or  whether  it  is  possible  to  prevent  others  doing  the  like,  and,  if  so, by  what  means.
"  2.  Unless  escapes  can  otherwise  be  prevented,  the  convicts  should ,     be  kept  in  irons  till  other  means  of  preven-
"  I  would   earnestly   recommend that   all  the  convicts  be  marked  on       tion    ai*6  available.
conspicnoui  i  place  such  as  the         «  3.  it  has    been    proposed   by    Captain
breast  or  arms.     Vessels  do  at  pre-
lent  touch  at  these  islands  search-     Man   (an    extract  from   whose  demi-official
mgfortrepang   and    birds'    uests,        j  &    {    ^    ^       ^^    nH[mo      fc  quoted  in
and   these  might  afford  opportuni-
ties for  the  convicts  to  escape,  and     the   margin)  to   brand   all  convicts    trans- r^ttCXp^^     Ported  to  Port  Blair.    The  chances  of  escape
the  country,  and    be    secure   from       ]jy     means    Of    boats  tOUOlling  at  the  islands,
as  supposed  by  Captain  Man  in  this  extract,
will  have  to  be  guarded  against  by  you  under  the  orders  of  Govern- ment contained  in  paragraph  19  of  my  letter  No.  743,  dated  the 7th  instant,  but  lest  the  precautions  against  the  resort  of  the  boats to  the  islands  should  be  evaded,  or  other  means  or  escape  should  pre- sent themselves,  it  may  be  necessary  to  have  recourse  to  branding. On  this  point,  I  am  desired  to  request  that  you  will  give  your  opi- nion.
"4.  Captain  Campbell,  the  senior  officer  of  the  Indian  Navy  who visited  Port  Blair  in  the  Semiramis,  has  been  consulted  as  to  the best  mode  of  preventing  escapes,  and  especially  whether  in  his  opi- nion any  additional  naval  means  are  necessary  for  that  purpose.
"  5.  The  President  in  Council  observes  from  your  report  that  out of  252  convicts  on  Chatham  Island,  75  were  sick  in  hospital.  It  was to  be  expected  that  there  would  be  much  sickness  during  the  first year  among  men  from  the  North-Western  Provinces,  in  a  climate where,  as  you  observe,  3  inches  of  rain  fall  in  a  few  hours,  and  where the  rainy  season  lasts  from  May  to  November  ;  but  the  nature  of  the
WITH  THE  ANDAMAXESE.  263
disease  which  has  suddenly  attacked  so  many  should  have  been  men- tioned, and  you  will  be  so  good  as  to  supply  this  omission."
In  reply  to  this  question  about  branding,  Dr.  Walker  writes ; — "I  concur  entirely  with  Captain  M/m's  suggestion.
"  2.  I  would  suggest  that  the  branding  be    on  the  front  of  tin;
P  B
right  fore-arm,  and  that  the  letters  -^—   be  marked  in  the  case  of  life,
and  -  j—  in  the  case  of  term  convicts,  and  that  in  every  case  the  con- vict's register  number,  which  is  the  key  to  all  information  regarding his  name,  caste,  crime,  sentence,  and  personal  description,  be  inserted
p.  B.   P.J^ below  the  letters,   as      L.        T.  .
1085       897
"  3.  The  letters  might  be  inserted  at  the  port  of  shipment,  leav- ing only  the  register  number  (which  cannot  be  known  elsewhere)  to be  inserted  here."
It  was  resolved  by  the  Government  of  India,  however,  on  the 28th  August,  1858,  that  the  convicts  of  the  Penal  Settlement should  not  be  branded.  By  July,  1858,  the  sick-rate  had  become  very high,  and  during  that  month  28  inches  of  rain  fell  in  the  Settlement. Dr.  Walker's  reports  show  that  some  of  the  guard  were  still  living in  tents,  and  that  his  carpenters  were  unskilled  and  worthless,  and the  materials  he  had  for  erecting  buildings,  inferior  and  insuffici- ent.
At  this  time,  he  began  to  feel  the  impossibility  of  carrying  on  the work  alone,  and  represented  that  a  Deputy  Superintendent  was  re- quired to  relieve  the  Superintendent  when  sick.
In  October  and  November,  1858,  the  Government  of  India  write regarding  the  escapes  of  convicts,  and  the  high  sick-rate.
20th  October,  1858  :—
"  4.  In  regard  to  the  number  of  escapes  reported  by  you,  and  to the  means  you  have  adopted  for  preventing  them  in  future,  His Honor  in  Council  desires  me  to  request  that  fetters  may  not  be  put on  the  convicts  as  a  general  measure,  if  it  be  possible  to  avoid  it. Experience  has  shown  that  the  imposition  of  fetters  does  not  prevent
264  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
men  from  escaping,  if  they  be  inclined  to  make  the  attempt ;  and  it will  not  deter  them  from  committing  suicide,  if  that  were  the  fate  of those  to  whom  you  refer  in  this  letter.
"  5.  If  fetters  be  imposed  on  tlie  general  body  of  the  convicts,  not only  will  they,  as  you  observe,  be  likely  to  be  driven  to  desperation but   the   present   sickness  among  them  will  be  increased,  and  their working  power  diminished."
On  the  6th  Novemher,  1858  :—
"  Now  that  huts  raised  five  feet  from  the  ground  have  been  built for  the  accommodation  of  1,000  prisoners  on  Ross  Island,  it  is  hoped that  the  health  of  the  men  will  greatly  improve.
"  The  President  in  Council  has  read  the  report  of  Dr.  Gamack, dated  the  25th  ultimo,  with  painful  interest.  It  would  appear,  how- ever, that  the  severe  sickness  and  mortality  among  the  convicts  has been  owing  chiefly  to  causes  of  a  temporary  nature,  unavoidable  on the  first  commencement  of  the  Settlement,  and  now  in  a  great measure  removed.
"  Up  to  the  28th  September,  there  had  been  169  deaths  in  hos- pital among  1,330  convicts,  being  at  the  rate  of  nearly  24  per  cent, per  annum.
"  The  number  of  sick  in  hospital  on  that  date  was  91,  or  about  10 per  cent,  of  the  whole  remaining  number."
The  question  of  obtaining  thatching  leaves  to  roof  the  buildings, properly  house  the  convicts,  and  thus  possibly  reduce  the  sick-rate, led  to  our  coming  more  into  contact  with  the  Andamanese.
On  the  17th  April,  1858,  Dr.  Walker  sent  the  Pluto  to  Tavoy for  thatching  leaves  and  other  materials.  These  were  despatched  in a  Chinese  junk,  which  was  towed  to  sea  by  the  Pluto  on  the  1st May.  The  junk  actually  got  to  within  sight  of  the  Andamans  when the  monsoon  changed,  and  owing  to  the  bad  weather  she  was  driven back  to  Tavoy,  where  she  discharged  her  cargo,  thus  causing  a  dead loss  to  Government  of  Rs.  2,500,  and  much  hindering  Dr.  Walker's work.
The   President   in   Council  remarked    on   this   that  he  trusted  it might    not   again   be   necessary    ta    send    for   leaves,    etc.,    to    the
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  265
Tenasserim  coast,  but  that  these  should  be  obtained  in  the  Anda- mans.  He  positively  prohibited  the  further  employment  of  steamers for  the  conveyance  of  thatching  leaves.
Dr.  Walker  was,  therefore,  obliged  to  search  in  the  heads  of  the creeks  for  these,  and  so  came  into  contact  with  the  aborigines  living there.  A  collision  appears  to  have  taken  place  between  the  officers and  men  of  the  surveying  brig  JHutlah,  and  the  Andamanese,  on the  5th  March,  1858.  The  quarrel  seems  to  have  been  commenced by  the  imprudent  conduct  of  a  midshipman,  whose  promotion  was accordingly  stopped,  and  one  of  the  officers  of  the  Mutlah  was killed  by  the  Andamanese.  His  watch  was  subsequently  found during  another  skirmish  on  the  5th  July,  1858.  Forty  Andamanese huts  were  destroyed  by  the  men  of  the  Mutlah  in  revenge.
While  the  Government  of  India  were  most  anxious  to  protect  the Andamanese  from  the  effects  of  our  occupation  of  their  country,  the feelings  of  the  officials  in  Port  Blair  were,  that  they  and  their  ships required  protection  from  the  Andamanese ;  and  as  Dr.  Walker  urges elsewhere,  with  regard  to  the  hostility  of  the  Andamanese,  the  weaker race  certainly  required  protection  or  they  would  be  exterminated,  but "  the  weaker  race  "  were  the  convicts,  and  not  the  Andamanese,  as the  Government  of  India  appeared  to  think.
Captain  Campbell,  of  the  Indian  Navy,  whose  opinion  was  asked  re- garding the  escapes  of  convicts,  writes  on  the  19th  June,  1858,  thai  :—
"  Convicts  cannot  be  prevented  from  escaping  when  working  on the  mainland,  but  they  will  only  escape  into  the  jungle  and  cannot get  away  from  the  Andamans,  as  the  savages  are  far  too  hostile  to allow  one  to  escape  them."
He  thought  that  the  guard  of  50  men,  the  effective  strength  of which  was  much  reduced  by  sickness,  should  be  increased,  and  that  a small  heavily  armed  steam  vessel  should  prowl  about  the  coasts  in  fine weather  to  warn  off  merchant  vessels,  and  at  the  same  time  protect them  from  the  savages.
On  the  19th  July,  1858,  30  additional  men  arrived  for  the  Naval Guard,  but  another  Indian  Navy  officer  was  badly  wanted.  A  mid- shipman had  been  temporarily  given,  but  Dr.  Walker  wrote,  with  a
2*
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
feeling  that  would  have  delighted  Captain  Marryat,"  I  am  of  opinion that  the  efficiency  of  the  Naval  Guard  will  be  better  secured  by  an increase  of  "Warrant  Officers,  than  by  the  addition  of  midshipmen."
This  argument  was  admitted  by  the  Government  of  India,  who, on  the  llth  August,  1858,  sent  two  Masters  to  replace  two  midship- men.
The  following  extracts  from  important  documents  will  show  the views  of  the  Government  of  India  regarding  escapes,  and  the  policy to  be  observed  towards  the  Andamanese,  and  Dr.  Walker's  reply  to the  same.
Extracts  from  letter  No.  1079,  dated  12th  July,  1858,  from  Cecil Beadon,  Esq.,  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  India  in  the  Home Department,  to  Dr.  J.  P.  Walker,  Superintendent  of  Port  Blair  :  —
"  3.  His  Honor  in  Council  is  gratified  to  learn  that  the  conduct  of the  convicts  since  your  last  report  had  been  satisfactory,  and  that  no further  attempts  to  escape  had  been  made.
"  5.  The  execution  of  the  prisoner  Narain,  who,  after  failing  to excite  the  other  convicts  of  his  gang  to  rebel,  attempted  to  escape  by swimming  to  the  main  island,  and  was  caught  in  the  act  of  escaping, was  approved  by  the  Government  of  India,  as  likely  to  deter  others from  following  his  example  ;  but  you  will  have  gathered  from  para- graphs 4  and  5  of  my  letter  of  the  7th  May,  in  which  that  approval was  conveyed,  that  it  did  not  enter  into  the  contemplation  of  the Government  that  any  large  number  who  made  their  escape  from  the Settlement  would  in  case  of  return  be  subjected  to  the  same  punish- ment. On  the  contrary,  it  was  said  that  these  misguided  men  must perish  unless  they  returned  to  the  Settlement,  and  a  hope  was  ex- pressed that  some  of  them  would  find  their  way  back,  and  that  their testimony  would  prevent  the  remainder  from  being  led  away  by false  stories.
"  6.  It  appears  that  notwithstanding  the  greatest  care  taken  to impress  upon  the  convicts  the  hopelessness  of  living  in  the  jungle, and  notwithstanding  the  means  adopted  to  prevent  escape,  one-third of  the  whole  number  of  convicts  got  away  within  fifty-one  days  after
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  £67
the  arrival  of  the  first  set.  It  is  said  that  in  the  months  of  March and  April  288  escaped — of  those,  at  least  80  have  been  executed,  1 has  heen  pardoned,  1  was  in  hospital  untried,  and  liO  remained  un- captured,  of  whom  it  is  improbable  that  any  remain  alive,  half  the number  being  known  to  have  perished.  In  every  case  of  recapture the  runaway  convicts  returned  and  delivered  themselves  up,  finding it  impossible  to  withstand  the  savages  or  exist  in  the  jungle.
"  I  am  directed  to  forward  a  copy  of  a  communication  from  Cap- tain Campbell,  No.  255,  dated  the  19th  June,  and  to  inform  that  he has  been  directed  to  double  the  guard.  With  this  additional  force, and  with  the  Charlotte  stationed  between  Ross  Island  and  the mainland,  it  is  hoped  that  any  further  attempts  on  the  part  of  the convicts  to  leave  the  Settlement  will  be  provided  against,  and  that there  will  be  complete  security  under  careful  management  against any  surprise.  You  will  no  doubt  take  the  precaution  of  removing  all boats  from  the  shore  at  night  fall,  and  making  them  fast  to  the  vessels at  anchor  in  the  harbour.
"  13.  In  the  16th  paragraph  of  your  letter  you  observe  that  the '  hostility  of  the  aborigines  to  the  settlers  is  unabated,  and  there  seems '  not  the  slightest  chance  of  being  able  to  effect  anything  with  them  by '  a  conciliating  policy.'  On  this  point,  the  Hon'ble  Court  have  ex- pressed a  desire  that  measures  should  be  taken  to  prevent  the  inhabit- ants of  the  island  from  suffering  injury  from  the  presence  of  the convicts.  I  am  therefore  directed  to  request  that  you  will  adhere strictly  to  the  conciliating  line  of  conduct  which  has  hitherto  been observed  towards  the  aborigines,  that  you  will  absolutely  prohibit  any aggression  upon  them,  and  that  force  may  on  no  account  be  resorted to,  unless  it  be  absolutely  necessary,  to  repel  their  attacks.
"  14.  The  President  in  Council  regrets  very  much  to  hear  that  a collision  ensued  between  the  savages  and  a  watering  party  of  the Naval  Guard,  in  consequence  of  the  latter  having  been  permitted  to land  unarmed,  contrary  to  express  order."
Dr.  Walker  replied,  in  letter  No.  241  of  7th  August,  1858,  to  the Government  of  India  in  the  Home  Department : —
"  As  my  establishment  of  disciplinary  officers  consisted  of  only  one
a  M  2
26S
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATION'S
European  and  one  Native  Overseer,  the  former  residing  at  night  on board  ship  and  the  latter  on  Chatham  Island,  it  was  impossible  that they  could  have  exercised  any  influence  in  preventing  escapes.
"3.  The  convicts  on  Chatham  Island,  Ross  Island,  and  at  Phoe- nix Bay  were  employed  in  clearing  jangle,  and  the  escapes  were effected  at  night.  Those  from  Boss  Island  crossed  to  the  main- land on  rafts.  The  Phoenix  Bay  convicts  had  only  to  enter  the jungle  they  were  clearing.  Those  from  Chatham  Island  were assisted  by  the  PhosnixBay  convicts,  who  sent  a  raft  for  them  from  the mainland.
"4.  The  convicts  were  not  guarded.  To  have  divided  the  Naval Guard,  mere  tyros  in  the  use  of  fire-arms,  into  three  detachments,  for night  duty  on  shore  at  each  of  the  localities,  would  have  exposed them  to  the  risk  of  being  massacred  by  mutineer  convicts  who  had been  accustomed  to  the  use  of  fire-arms  for  many  years.  But  the  Naval Guard  could  not  then,  nor  even  now,  reside  on  shore  without  serious injury  to  their  health.  Captain  Campbell,  I.N.,  whom  I  consulted, was  opposed  to  their  residing  on  shore  during  the  day,  and  when  I tried  the  experiment,  the  failing  state  of  their  health  required  that they  should  not  remain  longer  on  shore  than  was  necessary  as  my personal  guard ;  and  even  to  that  extent  the  length  of  time  I  was necessarily  engaged  on  shore,  now  heres  now  there,  was  considered along  with  the  pulling  work,  too  severe,  and  a  letter  by  Captain  Camp- bell, endorsed  by  Captain  Man  then  in  charge  at  Port  Blair,  reached me  suggesting  the  avoidance  of  too  long  exposure  to  the  sun  and night  air  at  this  critical  season.
E7
"  5.  But  had  the  Naval  Guard  been  on  shore  at  Phoenix  Bay, they  could  not  have  prevented  escapes  occurring,  for  when  convicts  are employed  on  the  mainland  in  clearing  jungle,  no  amount  of  guarding can  prevent  them  from  escaping,  if  so  inclined,  into  the  interior,  as they  must  necessarily  be  more  or  less  concealed  in  advance  of  their guard.
"  6.  The  insular  position  of  Chatham  and  Ross  Islands  admits  of their  being  guarded  by  boats  or  vessels  placed  between  them  and  the mainland,  and  that  arrangement  was  adopted  as  soon  as  boats  and
WITH  THE:  ANDAMANESE.
vessels  were  available.  My  letter  No.  74,  dated  7th  May,  represented that  no  boats  either  for  the  use  of  the  Settlement  generally,  or  for  the Naval  Guard  in  particular,  had  been  assigned,  and  I  submitted  copies of  my  urgent  letters  of  requisition,  Nos.  45  and  47,  to  the  Command- ers of  the  Hon'blo  Company's  steamers  Pluto  and  Semirawis,  by which  two  boats  were  obtained,  subsequently  to  the  escapes.  My letter  No.  76,  dated  19th  June,  reported  the  immediate  employment of  the  Hon'ble  Company's  schooner  Charlotte,  on  her  arrival  here  on the  24th  May,  in  guarding  Ross  Island.  On  the  night  following the  receipt  of  the  second  boat  she  was  manned  by  a  night  guard  and placed  between  Chatham  Island  and  the  mainland.
"7.  The  obstacles  which  then  (as  now)  were  anticipated  would have  prevented  the  convicts  from  escaping,  are  the  impossibility  of subsisting  on  the  mainland  independently  of  the  Settlement,  the hostility  of  the  savage  aborigines,  and  the  hopelessness  of  escaping to  the  continent  of  India.  These  were  not  then  considered  by  the convicts  to  be  insuperable  difficulties,  and  they  escaped  from  their working  localities  to  the  mainland,  and  were  they  now  to  become impressed  with  the  belief  that  these  ends  are  attainable,  I  apprehend that  the  insularity  of  Chatham  Island  and  Ross  Island  the  only natural  obstacles  to  escapes,  would  not  hinder  them  from  making  the attempt  to  adopt  some  means  for  eluding  the  vigilance  of  guards when  the  weather,  tide,  and  darkness  of  the  night  favour  their  project.
"  8.  With  regard  to  the  means  which  have  since  been  taken  to  pre- vent escapes,  the  Hon'ble  Company's  ship  Sesoslris  is  anchored between  Ross  Island  and  the  mainland,  as  far  into  the  channel  as  is considered  safe,  and  as  will  admit  her  communicating  by  signals  with the  Hon'ble  Company's  schooner  Charlotte  anchored  as  far  into  the channel  between  Chatham  Island  and  the  mainland  as  is  considered safe.  When  the  weather  permits,  both  of  the  positions  are  strengthened at  night  by  detachments  of  the  Naval  Guard  in  the  settlement  boats, the  latter  arrangement,  however,  being  maintained  at  the  loss  of health  of  the  guard,  seventeen  of  whom  were  at  one  time  sick  in  hos- pital, chiefly  from  the  effect  of  night  exposure,  as  reported  by  the  offi- cer in  medical  charge.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  duty  required  from
270
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
the  Naval  Guard  is  very  trying.  A  petty  officer  attached  for  ten months  to  a  land  battery  in  the  Crimea  describes  the  service  here  as more  severe  than  there.
"  9.  The  measures  in  force  have  been  so  successful  that  no  escapes occurred  between  the  24th  April  and  the  24th  July,  when  four  con- victs either  effected  their  escape  from  Boss  Island  at  night  or  com- mitted suicide  by  drowning.  The  night  being  clear  and  windy,  it  was not  deemed  necessary  to  despatch  a  guard  boat  in  advance  of  the Sesostris  as  usual.  No  one  here  believes  that  the  men,  who  were weakly,  would  have  crossed  to  the  mainland.  Since  then,  no  escape has  occurred."
Dr.  Walker  pushed  on  the  Settlement  with  great  energy.  Bam- boos and  thatching  leaves  having  been  found  in  the  jungle  were  cut and  brought  in  by  the  convicts,  who,  with  them,  made  huts  for  them- selves, and  by  September,  1858  (thinking  that  to  be  the  end  of  the rainy  season,  instead  of  what  it  really  was,  the  change  of  the  mon- soon), Dr.  Walker  began  to  sink  wells  at  the  upper  end  of  the  har- bour, and  arrange  to  occupy  the  mainland  there.  His  idea  was,  on the  arrival  of  the  Sebundy  Guard  from  Madras,  to  send  a  division  of 421  convicts  to  the  neck  of  land  between  Port  Blair  and  Port  Mouat ; these  men  were  to  settle  in  sixteen  villages  on  the  Port  Blair  side  of the  neck,  and  a  similar  division  was  to  settle  in  sixteen  villages  on  the Port  Mouat  side.  Each  village  was  to  be  660  feet  broad,  the  Port Blair  villages  extending  west  towards  Port  Mouat,  and  the  Port Mouat  villages  extending  east  towards  Port  Blair.  He  considered that  intermediate  villages  might  also  be  necessary  to  strengthen  the whole  as  a  frontier  against  the  savages,  and  advocated  having  1,684 convicts  cultivating  64  villages.  He  also  wished  to  encourage  these convicts  to  get  their  wives  and  families  down  from  India.
Towards  the  close  of  the  year,  the  number  of  escapes  considerably diminished ;  occasionally  an  escaped  convict  returned,  but  generally all  who  went  into  the  jungle  were  killed  by  the  aborigines.
Dr.  Walker's  proposals  for  the  protection  of  the  aborigines,  which wore  submitted  under  the  following  circumstances,  are  here  given.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANE5E.
271
A  skirmish  took  place  between  a  party  of  the  Naval  Brigade  aad the  Andamanose,  between  North  and  Perseverance  Points,  on  the  5th August,  1858,  the  details  of  which  were  as  follows  : —
A  signal  was  made  from  the  schooner  Charlotte  on  that  day that  natives  were  in  sight  on  the  north  side  of  the  bay,  and  Lieutenant Templer,  I.N.,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Rowe,  Chief  Officer  of  the Sesostris,  proceeded  with  one  petty  officer  and  eight  men  to  re- connoitre and  watch  their  movements.  This  was  done  by  order  of Dr.  Walker,  who  writes  of  the  affair : —
"  On  rounding  Perseverance  Point,  one  man  was  seen  in  a  canoe close  under  the  mangrove  bushes,  who  was  evidently  trying  to  get away.  Chase  was  given,  and  as  the  party  approached,  two  more canoes  were  seen  hauled  up  on  the  shore.  On  nearing  the  first  one, the  party  was  received  with  a  shower  of  arrows,  and,  as  it  is  added  ia the  report  of  the  skirmish  that  a  native  on  the  shore  was  shot,  it  is  to be  inferred  that  the  shower  of  arrows  came  from  the  shore,  and  that it  was  returned  with  bullets  from  the  boat.
*•  Lieutenant  Templer  then,  leaving  four  men  in  the  boat  under Mr.  Rowe,  landed  vith  five  men,  and  after  some  firing  seized  the canoe  that  was  there  and  then  rushed  through  the  village  and  seized the  other  two  canoes  on  the  other  side  of  the  mangroves.
"  The  party  then,  after  destroying  some  of  the  huts  which  were too  green  to  burn,  returned  with  three  canoes  and  the  body  of  the native  who  was  killed,  the  other  natives  howling  most  piteously  after them.  Not  one  of  the  party  was  touched,  but  Lieutenant  Templer thinks  that  several  of  the  natives  were  wounded,  as  five  or  six  were seen  to  drop.  Lieutenant  Templer,  in  his  report,  expressed  his  inten- tion of  destroying  the  village  with  my  permission,  and  this  was  accord- ingly done.  In  one  of  the  canoes  there  was  found  part  of  a  watch  sup- posed to  belong  to  one  of  the  officers  of  the  Mutlah  who  was murdered  by  the  savages  on  the  5th  March,  1858."
The  Government  of  India,  in  commenting  upon  this  occurrence, state  in  a  letter  to  Dr.  Walker : —
"  You  have  already  been  made  aware  of  the  wishes  of  the  Court of  Directors  in  regard  to  the  policy  to  be  observed  towards  the  natives
272  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
of  the  Andamans,  and  in  paragraph  13  of  my  letter  No.  1079,  dated 12th  ultimo,  you  were  requested  to  'adhere  strictly  to  the  conciliat- ing line  of  conduct  which  has  hitherto  been  observed  towards  the aborigines ',  to  '  absolutely  prohibit  any  aggression  upon  them ' and  not  to  allow  force  on  any  account  to  be  resorted  to  '  unless  it  be absolutely  necessary  to  repel  their  attacks.'
"  8.  These  instructions  are  of  date  subsequent  to  the  occurrence now  reported,  but  Lieutenant  Templer's  proceedings  appear  to  the President  in  Council  to  afford  very  proper  opportunity  for  emphati- cally repeating  them  for  your  guidance,  and  for  that  of  all  the  officers and  men  employed  at  the  Settlement.
'*  9.  On  this  occasion,  as  it  appears  from  the  papers,  our  people were  the  assailants.  Though  the  disposition  of  the  natives  at  large is  known  to  be  hostile,  there  is  no  ground  assigned  for  supposing  that they  appeared  on  the  north  side  of  the  port  and  established  a  village there  with  any  special  intention  of  giving  annoyance.  The  attack, therefore,  was  unprovoked  and  without  justification.  The  native  who was  seen  in  a  canoe  very  naturally  tried  to  get  away  when  he  saw  the armed  boat  approaching,  but  there  was  no  reason  for  immediately giving  chase  and  pursuing  the  man  to  within  the  reach  of  the  arrows of  his  own  countrymen.
"  10.  The  subsequent  capture  of  the  canoes  and  partial  destruction of  the  village  appear  to  have  been  ordered  as  act  of  retaliation  for  the attack  of  the  natives  on  the  boat ;  but  this  attack  tvas  provoked by  Lieutenant  Templer's  pursuit  of  the  man  in  the  canoe,  and  the complete  destruction  of  the  village  on  a  subsequent  day  was  an  un- necessary and  deliberate  act  of  revenge  not  calculated,  any  more  than the  original  pursuit  of  the  canoe,  to  induce  the  natives  to  abandon their  hostility  towards  us.
"  11.  The  President  in  Council  fully  appreciates  the  difficulties  of your  position.  But  the  aborigines  of  the  A  ndamans  are  apparently unable  to  conceive  the  possibility  of  the  two  races  co-existing  on  the islands,  except  on.terms  of  internecine  hostility.  This  idea  is  assuredly strengthened  by  every  attack  we  make  upon  them,  and  can  only  be driven  out  of  their  minds  by  a  course  of  persistent  conciliation  arid
WITH  THE  ANDAMANES3.  273
forbearance  on  our  part.  The  President  in  Council  would  have  been disposed  to  encourage  the  settlement  of  a  village  of  these  savages  on the  north  side  of  the  bay,  where  they  could  not  at  present  interfere with  the  progress  of  the  Settlement  or  give  us  any  annoyance,  and where  they  might  gradually  become  familiar  with  our  appearance and  divest  themselves  of  the  fear  which  is  obviously  the  moving cause  of  their  present  aversion.  Every  effort  must  be  made  to  teach them  that  we  desire  to  cultivate  friendly  relations,  and  have  no  inten- tion of  attacking  them  or  doing  them  any  injury,  unless  they  compel us  to  act  in  self-defence."
Dr.  "Walker  then  submitted  the  following  proposals  for  the  pro- tection of  the  aborigines  :  —
Letter  No.  304  to  Homo  Department,  4th  September,  1858.
"  Paragraph  3. — The  precautions  I  propose  to  take  for  the  protec- tion of  the  aborigines  from  collision  with  the  convicts  are  to  select  a suitable  portion  of  the  Great  Andaman  Island,  of  sufficient  area  for cultivation  for  many  years  by  several  thousand  convict  settlers,  and which,  from  the  natural  formation  of  the  land,  is  susceptible  of  isola- tion by  a  military  cordon,  then  to  expel  the  aborigines  out  of  the Settlement  land  and  keep  them  out  by  the  military  guard,  unless  they manifest  a  desire  to  cultivate  friendly  relations,  which  will  be  encour. aged  by  all  means  which  experience  may  indicate  as  likely  to  be  suc- cessful.
"4.  I  have  selected  about  fifty  square  miles  of  the  southernmost part  of  the  Great  Andaman  for  the  convict  settlement,  bounded  on the  east  by  the  ocean,  on  the  south  by  McPherson's  Straits,  on  the west  by  the  Labyrinth,  on  the  north  by  Port  Miouat  and  Port  Blair  with the  intermediate  neck  of  land  about  two  miles  in  breadth.  It  is  on this  neck  of  land  that  I  propose  to  construct  entrenchments,  fortlets, or  stockades,  and  establish  a  military  cordon  with  the  local  corps  of Madrasis,  now  being  raised  for  the  Settlement  service  for  the  pro- tection of  the  convicts  against  the  murderous  attacks  of  the  abori- gines, and  thus  avoid  the  necessity,  which  otherwise  would  exist,  of placing  arms  in  the  hands  of  convict  sepoys  for  the  purposes  of  self-
2s
274  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  REL\TIOXS
defence,   a  step   which  the  Hon'blc  Court   truly   observes  '  it  wns obviously  expedient  to  avoid.'
"  5.  The  expulsion  of  the  aboriginal  savages  from  the  Settlement lands,  it  is  supposed,  will  be  effected  by  their  gradual  retirement  as the  occupation  of  the  land  by  the  convict  settlers  proceeds.  Should they,  however,  continue  their  murderous  assaults  upon  the  unarmed convicts,  it  will  be  necessary  to  expel  tlum  with  as  little  force  as possible  to  prevent  'those  collisions  with  the  convicts  which  it  is only  too  probable  will  be  provoked  on  both  sides,'  and  which,  as  the Hon'ble  Court  remarks,  'once  commenced  are  so  likely  to  end  in  the extermination  of  the  weaker  race.'  As  far  as  I  can  judge,  the  un- armed convicts  are  the  weaker  race,  and  unless  they  be  well  pro- tected, they  will  be  exterminated  by  the  savages.  I  think  it  probable that  even  the  detachments  of  the  military  guard  will  occasionally  be attacked  by  the  savages  and  massacred,  unless  constantly  on  the  alert, and  well  prepared  to  defend  themselves."
The  Government  of  India  in  the  Home  Department  (letter No.  1823,  of  the  3rd  December,  1858),  in  acknowledging  letter No.  304  of  the  4th  September  from  Dr.  Walker  regarding  measures to  be  taken  to  prevent  collisions  between  Andamanese  and  convicts, state,  after  quoting  the  details  of  the  proposed  plan  : —
"  Paragraph  3.  For  this  purpose  you  have  selected  the  southern- most part  of  the  Great  Andaman,  bounded  on  the  north  by  Port  Blair and  Port  Mouat,  and  the  intermediate  neck  of  land  about  two  miles in  breadth.  On  this  neck  you  propose  to  construct  entrenchments, fortlets,  or  stockades,  and  establish  a  military  cordon  with  the  local corps  of  Madrasis  now  being  raised  for  service  in  the  Andamans, with  a  view  to  protect  the  convicts  from  the  attacks  of  the  aborigines and  to  avoid  the  necessity  for  arming  the  convicts  in  self-defence.
"  4.  It  might  perhaps  be  beneficial  to  the  Settlement  in  a  sani- tary point  of  view  to  cut  a  broad  vista  through  the  jungle  from  Port Blair  to  Port  Mouat,  and  it  might  have  the  effect  of  inducing  the savages  to  keep  to  the  north  of  the  line  thus  laid  down  ;  but  if  any attempt  be  made  to  drive  them  by  force  out  of  the  southern  part  of the  island,  the  orders  of  the  Hon'ble  Court  and  of  this  Government,
WITH  THE  ANDAMAN  ESE.  275
which  restrict  the  use  of  force  against  the  aborigines,  except  for   the purposes  of  self-defence,  will  be  contravened.
''  5.  Moreover,  it  appears  to  the  President  in  Council  that  the plan  you  have  formed  is  based  on  an  expectation  that  the  number  of rebel  and  mutineer  convicts  at  the  Settlement  will  be  indefinitely increased,  and  may  amount  to  several  thousands — an  expectation which,  now  that  an  amnesty  has  been  proclaimed,  and  the  rebels  are beginning  to  surrender  on  promise  of  pardon,  is  not  at  all  likely  to  be realised.  1  here  has  been  found  great  difficulty  also  in  inducing  men to  enlist  for  the  service,  and  though  higher  terms  have  been  offered, some  time  must  elapse  before  the  company  of  Sebundis  can  be  raised and  placed  at  your  disposal.  Even  then,  as  it  appears  to  the  Presi- dent in  Council,  the  Sebundis  will  be  required  f9r  the  ordinary duties  of  the  Settlement,  in  addition  to  the  European  guard,  and  can hardly  be  spared  for  the  purpose  of  guarding  such  a  line  as  you  pro- pose  at  a  distance  from  headquarters.
"  6.  Taking  these  circumstances  into  consideration,  it  appears  to the  President  in  Council  that  it  would  be  on  the  whole  a  more  pru- dent measure,  after  occupying  the  islands  in  Port  Blair,  to  clear  the mainland  gradually  and  uniformly  from  the  south  shore  of  the  bay, establishing  advanced  posts  near  the  edge  of  the  jungle,  and  leaving only  cultivation  and  the  dwellings  of  the  colonists  in  the  rear.  In this  way  the  operations  of  all  the  convicts  would  be  carried  on  under your  own  immediate  view  and  almost  within  call  of  Ross  Island, where  you  have  established  the  headquarters  of  the  Settlement.  It is  not  likely  that  the  savages  would  venture  out  of  the  jungle  to attack  the  convicts  in  the  cleared  country  or  in  their  villages,  but should  they  do  so,  they  would  be  easily  repulsed,  and  there  would then  be  no  reason  for  abstaining  from  the  use  of  such  force  as  might be  necessary  for  the  purpose."
The  remarks  of  the  Government  of  India  are  sufficient*  comments on  Dr.  Walker's  scheme,  which,  as  it  never  came  into  operation,  need not  be  further  dealt  with,  and  is  only  quoted  in  order  to  show  the line  of  policy  which  the  Settlement  authorities  considered  should  be
276
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
adopted  towards  the  Andamanese,  and  the  beat  of  their  minds  where Andamanese  were  concerned.
On  the  8th  October,  1858,  Viper  Island  was  occupied  by  four  sec- tions of  convicts,  and  a  guard  of  the  Naval  Brigade,  who  lived  on shore  during  the  day  and  passed  the  night  in  a  boat.  The  Charlotte anchored  off  Viper  as  a  guardship.
By  this  time  the  convicts  had  begun  to  distrust  each  other,  and owing  to  informers  among  them,  several  attempts  to  escape  were frustrated.  Having  Viper  Island  as  a  headquarter  station,  two attempts  were  made  to  cross  the  South  Andaman  Island  from  Port Blair  to  Port  Mouat,  but  without  success,  as  the  track  cut  was  taken too  far  to  the  northward.  The  Andamanese  collected  at  night  round the  encampment  of  the  party  in  large  numbers,  but  there  was  no  col- lision.
Dr.  Walker  had  some  hope,  which  was  subsequently  realised,  of trying  to  make  friends  with  the  A.ndamanese  near  Viper  Island.  By the  close  of  the  year  they  were  believed  to  have  killed  170  runaway convicts.
In  March  1869,  a  runaway  convict  returned  from  the  jungle  and informed  Dr.  Walker  that  he  had  been  taken  prisoner  by  the  abori- gines and  had  remained  with  them  for  two  or  three  days,  during which  time  he  was  well  treated  and  witnessed  their  mode  of  life. He  said  that  they  subsisted  upon  cooked  food  obtained  by  hunting and  fishing,  that  they  obtained  their  supply  of  fresh  water  from  a river  (which  was  untrue),  that  they  cooked  everything  they  eat,  and, so  far  as  he  could  judge,  showed  no  signs  of  being  cannibals.
The  general  hostility  of  the  Andamanese  towards  the  settlers  was as  great  as  ever,  and  working  parties  were  continually  being  attacked by  them.
In  March  1859,  the  Naval  Guard  were  attacked  at  Watering Cove,  but  no  harm  was  done.
On  the  6th  April,  248  convicts  of  the  first  division,  employed  in digging  wells,  constructing  huts,  and  clearing  the  jungle  at  Haddo, on  the  mainland  opposite  Chatham  Island,  were  attacked  by  about 200  of  the  aborigines  who  were  armed  with  bows  and  arrows.  Three
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
27:
convicts  were  killed  on  the  spot,  and  one  was  so  severely  wounded that  he  died  in  hospital  the  next  day.  Five  convicts  were  more  or less  severely  wounded  with  arrows.  The  savages  carried  off  a  consi- derable number  of  the  convicts'  working  tools,  clothes,  and  cooking vessels.  The  convicts  were  quite  unable  to  cope  with  their  opponents, and  were  obliged  to  save  themselves  by  taking  to  the  sea.  The  Naval Guard  arrived  too  late  to  be  of  any  use.  Dr.  Walker  did  not  like  to trust  a  small  body  of  Europeans  among  so  many  convicts,  and  hoped by  having  a  large  file  of  convicts  that  they  would,  by  their  numbers, be  able  to  resist  the  savages.
On  the  14th  April,  at  about  noon,  when  the  convicts  of  the  two divisions  were  employed  in  cooking,  they  were  suddenly  attacked  by a  very  large  number  of  aborigines  estimated  at  about  1,500,  armed with  small  axes  and  knives,  in  addition  to  bows  and  arrows.  The convicts  attempted  to  resist,  but  were  quite  unequal  to  the  work, and  after  having  three  killed  on  the  spot,  and  six  severely  wounded, they  were  obliged  to  retire  into  the  sea  under  the  protecting  fire  of the  Naval  Guard  boat  moored  off  the  landing  place,  while  the  savages remained  in  possession  of  the  encampment,  and  carried  off  the  work- ing tools,  clothing,  and  cooking  vessels  of  the  two  divisions.  Out  of the  446  convicts  present,  12  had  fetters  on,  and  these  the  savages selected,  and  having  removed  their  fetters,  carried  them  off  into  the jungle,  and  they  have  not  been  seen  since.
The  convicts  described  the  savages  as  showing  no  disposition  to attack  any  one  with  a  mark  of  imprisonment  (such  as  the  iron  ring round  the  ankle),  unless  oppose;!,  but  as  anxious  to  attack  and  mur- der the  section  gangsmen,  the  sub -division  gangsmen,  and  the division  gangsmen,  who  do  not  wear  the  ring,  and  are  marked  by wearing  a  red  turban,  badge,  and  coloured  belt.  They  called  upon  the convicts  to  stand  aside  and  let  them  go  into  the  water  and  attack the  Naval  Guard  in  the  boat.  During  the  two  hours  they  had  pos- session of  the  encampment  they  beckoned  to  the  convicts  to  come  and dance  with  them,  and  they,  from  fear,  complied.  Ludicrous  groups of  savages  with  a  convict  on  each  side,  with  arms  entwined,  were engaged  in  stamping  motions  which  appeared  intended  for  dancing.
278
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
Dr.  Walker  proceeded  with  Lieutenant  Hcllard  to  the  spot,  and finding  that  the  convicts  demanded  either  to  be  protected,  or  to  be afforded  the  means  of  protecting  themselves,  had  Division  No.  1  sent to  Aberdeen,  and  Division  No.  4  to  Viper  Island.
(With  regard  to  the  above,  the  Andamanese  have  told  me  that what  they  objected  to  was  that  the  convicts  destroyed  their  jungle by  clearing,  etc  ;  they  saw  that  the  labouring  convicts  did  not  want to  work,  and  that  the  gangsmen  made  them,  so  they  attacked  all  the people  who  were  in  authority.  Eventually  the  gangsmen  begged  to have  their  distinguishing  marks  taken  off,  and  to  be  allowed  to  have an  axe  or  other  tool  in  their  hands,  in  order  that  the  Andamanese might  not  single  them  out.)
During  the  first  half  of  April,  the  Andamanese  showed  themselves at  Aberdeen  in  small  numbers  (from  8  to  20)  four  times.  On  the convicts  turning  out  to  attack  them,  they  disappeared.
On  the  28th  April,  a  party  from  Her  Majesty's  ship  Char- lotte (schooner)  landed  at  North  Point,  and  without  provocation were  attacked  by  the  aborigines,  and  one  of  the  European  seamen received  a  wound  from  an  iron-headed  arrow,  the  point  of  which  snap- ped off  in  the  wound.  Dr.  Walker  then  forbade  any  one  to  land  on the  mainland  on  pleasure  excursions.
On  the  llth  May,  1859,  the  aborigines  attacked  Aberdesn  and Atalanta  Point.  Owing  to  timely  warning  from  two  escaped  con- victs who  had  been  travelling  with  the  aborigines,  the  attack  was provided  for  and  the  plunder  of  the  tools  on  a  large  scale  prevented. The  Naval  Guard  was  landed  at  Aberdeen ;  the  Charlotte  anchored between  E oss  and  Atalanta  Point;  Lieutenant  Warden,  I.N.,  landed a  party  of  naval  men,  and  marching  to  the  top  of  Aberdeen  hill  put l.he  convicts  in  his  rear  for  protection;  while  the  Charlotte's  men  stopped the  aborigines  who  were  coming  along  the  shore.  Lieutenant  Warden was  attacked  from  the  jungle,  and,  owing  to  the  numbers  of  the  sav- ages, retreated  into  the  boats, from  whence  he  protected  the  convicts  who had  gathered  on  the  pier,  and  in  the  water,  by  firing  over  their  heads. The  Charlotte's  guns  too  opened  fire  on  the  savages,  who  held  possession of  the  convict  station  for  over  half  an  hour,  plundering  everything
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
279
worth  carrying  off.  Lieutenant  Hellard  I.N.,  with  a  party  of Naval  Brigade  men,  Dr.  "Walker's  crew,  and  a  number  of  convicts, rushed  up  the  hill  and  drove  off  tho  aborigines.  None  of  the  convicts were  wounded,  but  several  of  the  savages  are  supposed  to  have  been.
A  few  clays  afterwards  another  attack  was  threatened,  but  though the  Andamanese  entered  the  place  whore  the  convicts  were  clearing the  jungle,  they  did  not  follo\v  them  when  they  retreated  to  the station.
The  above-mentioned  fight,  which  was  afterwards  known  in  the Settlement  as  "  The  Battle  of  Aberdeen,"  was  the  most  serious  colli- sion with  the  Andamanese  which  occurred  at  all.  Had  not Dr.  Walker  received  notice  regarding  it  from  Life  Convict  Dudhnath Tewari,  No.  276,  who  had  escaped  almost  immediately  after  his arrival,  on  the  23rd  April,  185S,  and  had  lived  with  the  Andamanese ever  since,  had  learnt  their  language,  and  had  become  cognizant  of  the arrangements  for  the  fight  which  had  beea  arranged  in  detail  for  some time  previously,  very  serious  damage  might  have  been  caused.
Dudhnath  has  often  been  abused  since  for  his  exaggerated  and  un- truthful statements  regarding  the  Andamanese,  but  he  certainly did  good  service  to  the  Government  at  this  time,  and  fully  earned  the pardon  which  was  subsequently  granted  to  him  on  this  account  by the  Government  of  India.  He  made  some  lengthened  statement  to Dr.  Walker,  which  was  forwarded  to  the  Government  of  India,  but  of which  I  have  been  unable  to  obtain  a  copy.  In  Chambers'  Journal for  March,  1860,  a  selection  from  this  statement  is  published  with comments,  and  an  abridgment  of  the  article  in  the  Journal  is  here- with given.  Judging  from  it,  I  should  say  that  Dudhnath  was  not nearly  such  a  liar  as  he  is  supposed  to  have  been.  His  is  the  first at  all  accurate  idea  which  we  obtained  of  the  Andamanese  and  their customs  in  the  present  century.
Dudhnath  Tewari,  a  Sepoy  of  the  14th  Regiment  of  Native  In- fantry, having  been  convicted  of  mutiny  and  desertion,  was  sen- tenced by  the  Commission  at  Jhelum  to  transportation  for  life  and labour  in  irons.  He  was  received  at  the  Penal  Settlement  at  Port
2JJQ  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
Blair,  per  ship  Roman  Emperor  from  Kurrachee,  on  the  6th  April 1858,  and  was  given  the  number  276.  He  escaped  from  Koss  Island, Port  Blair,  on  the  23rd  April,  IS 58,  and  after  a  residence  of  one  year and  twenty-four  days  in  the  Andaman  jungle  with  the  aborigines, voluntarily  returned  to  the  convict  station  at  Aberdeen,  on  the  south side  of  Port  Blair,  on  the  17th  May,  1859.
He  escaped,  with  ninety  other  convicts,  upon  rafts  made  from felled  trees  bound  together  with  tent  ropes,  Ago,  a  convict  gangsman of  limited  geographical  knowledge,  having  assured  them  that  the  oppo- site shore  was  within  ten  days  march  of  the  capital  of  Burmah,  under the  Rajah  of  which  place  it  was  his  intention  to  take  service.
On  reaching  the  mainland  of  the  Andamans,  and  penetrating  the jungle  a  little,  they  were  joined,  two  days  after  their  escape,  by a  further  large  body  of  convicts  who  had  escaped  at  the  same  time they  had  from  Phoenix  Bay  and  Chatham  Island.  Aga  appears  to have  been  in  command  of  the  entire  body  of  runaways  who  num- bered 130.
For  fourteen  days  this  party  progressed  with  exceeding  slowness through  the  jungle,  not  knowing  even  in  what  direction  they  moved, and  sometimes  their  wanderings  led  them  back  to  a  place  which  they had  passed  days  before.  All  the  food  and  necessaries  secretly  pre- pared for  this  expedition  had  been  lost  at  the  beginning,  during  the crossing  by  the  men  of  the  channel  between  Ross  Island  and  the mainland.  For  eight  days  they  had  almost  nothing  to  eat,  afterwards those  who  could  climb  the  tall  branchless  trees  got  a  little  of  some pleasant  fruit  like  the  Indian  ber.  Water  was  very  scarce,  and  only found  in  the  form  of  small  springs  oozing  through  the  sides  of  the hills.  A  few  men  had  saved  their  axes,  and  with  these  the  stems of  a  huge  creeping  cane  were  cut  and  so  some  water  obtained. Twelve  of  the  party  through  hunger  and  thirst  were  left  during  this period  to  die.
For  the  first  thirteen  days  they  never  came  upon  any  of  the  abo- rigines, although  they  found  their  deserted  huts,  but  on  the  four- teenth  dny,  at  noon,  about  four  miles  in  the  interior,  they  were surrounded  by  about  100  savages  armed  with  bows  and  arrows.  The
WITH  THE  ANDAMA.NESE.  281
convicts  offered  no  resistance  and  only  supplicated  for  mercy  by signs  and  attitudes  which  were  disregarded.  An  indiscriminate slaughter  of  thorn  by  the  savages  took  place,  and  there  were  a  great number  of  killed  and  wounded  when  Dudhnath  Tewdri  took  to  flight in  the  dense  jungle,  with  three  bad  arrow  wounds,  on  the  eyebrow, the  right  shoulder,  and  the  left  elbow.
Shoo  Dull,  another  (Brahmin)  convict,  who  was  wounded  in  the back,  fled  with  him,  and  together  they  got  along  a  salt  water  tidal creek  to  the  sea  shore,  where,  an  hour  afterwards,  they  were  joined by  a  convict  of  the  Kurmi  caste.
They  passed  the  night  in  that  spot,  and  in  the  morning  were  seen by  a  party  of  aborigines  (a  tribe  of  some  sixty  men,  women,  and children),  who  were  embarking  in  five  canoes.  They  fled  into  the jungle  and  were  pursued  by  the  savages,  who,  firing,  killed  Tewari's two  companions  and  wounded  him.  He  feigned  death,  and  was pulled  out  of  his  hiding  place  by  the  leg ;  but  on  making  suppli- cation to  them  by  joining  his  hands,  they  withdrew  a  short  distance and  fired  at  him  wounding  him  in  the  left  wrist,  and  in  the  hip.  He again  pretended  to  be  dead,  and  on  their  taking  the  arrow  from  his hip,  again  besought  them  to  spare  him,  which,  this  time,  they  did. They  helped  him  into  a  boat,  and  put  red  earth  moistened  with  water round  his  neck  and  nostrils,  and  a  lighter  coloured  earth  over  his  body and  wounds,  and  took  him  to  a  neighbouring  Island.  (This  Island is  named  Termugli,  and  is  one  of  the  Labyrinth  Islands  south  of  the outer  harbour  of  Port  Mouat,  being  identified  by  Tewari,  who  had hitherto  thought  that  it  was  part  of  the  mainland  of  Burmah.  The tribe  who  captured  him  was  the  Termugu-da  Sept  of  the  Aka- -Sea-da Tribe,  and  was  an  Ax-yauto  Sept — M.  V.  P.)
During  the  entire  year  he  was  away  Tewari  was  always  wandering about  with  this  tribe  from  island  to  island,  or  on  the  mainland, never  staying  long  in  any  one  place.  While  he  was  with  them,  he wore  no  clothes  whatever,  shaved  his  head,  and  in  all  respects  con- formed to  their  customs,  enjoying  throughout  the  best  of  health,  but for  his  wounds.
Most  of  these  healed  in  about  a  month,  except  the  elbow  wound
2  o
2S2
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  GELATIONS
•which  remained  sore  for  three  months.  The  aborigines  never  exacted service  from  him,  but  for  a  long  time  looked  upon  him  with  great suspicion,  and  to  the  last  never  permitted  him,  even  in  sport,  to  take up  a  bow  and  arrow ;  they  always  told  him  to  sit  down  and  be  quiet if  he  attempted  it.  When  he  had  been  away  for  some  four  months, Pooteah,  one  of  the  elder  natives,  made  over  to  him  as  wives  his daughter  Leepa  (aged  twenty),  and  a  young  woman  of  sixteen called  Jigah,  the  daughter  of  Heera.  Before  young  ladies  marry, they  are  considered  to  be  common  property  among  both  married and  single  Andamen,  but  when  they  have  husbands  they  hence- forth behave  themselves  with  the  greatest  propriety ;  even  widows are  never  known  to  smile  upon  the  male  sex  again.  (!)
Tewari  supposes  that  he  saw  about  one  quarter  of  the  Great Andaman  Island  during  his  wanderings,  and  certainly  as  many  as 15,000  natives  in  all.  They  generally  live  in  the  jungle  bordering upon  the  sea  coast,  for  convenience  of  procuring  fish,  shell-fish,  and fresh  water,  though  some  inhabit  the  banks  of  salt  water  creeks  in  the interior.
All  penetrate  the  jungle  for  pigs  and  fruits,  but  usually  return  to the  coast  at  sunset.  The  whole  population  is  migratory,  moving  in troops  of  from  thirty  to  three  hundred  individuals,  but  all  are  one tribe  and  use  the  same  language  and  customs.  The  deaths  were not  so  numerous  as  the  births,  from  which  circumstance  it  may  be supposed  that  the  population  is  increasing.  The  aborigines  are  not cannibals,  nor  do  they  eat  uncooked  animal  food,  but  they  have  no idea  of  a  Supreme  Being,  and  go  about  entirely  naked,  their  coats being  only  of  paint.  The  trousseau  of  the  Andaman  brides  is  very  in expensive,  and  the  marriage  ceremony  the  reverse  of  ceremonious. No  preliminary  arrangements  of  any  kind  are  made.  If  any  one of  the  seniors  think  that  a  young  man  and  a  young  woman  should be  united,  he  sends  for  them  and  marries  them  himself ;  the  consent of  either  party  is  never  asked,  nor  does  the  wedding  company — except when  there  are  two  wives — ever  extend  beyond  these  three.
Dudhndth  Tewdri  beheld  five  marriages  and  they  were  all  alike.
Towards  evening  the  bride,  having   painted   her   body   in   stripes
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  283
•with  her  fingers  smeared  with  red  earth  moistened  with  turtle  oil,  sits on  leaves  spread  on  the  ground  by  way  of  carpet  or  bed,  while  the bridegroom  similarly  painted  squats  on  his  carpet  of  leaves  a  few paces  off.  They  thus  sit  silent  for  an  hour,  when  the  person  who united  them  comes  from  his  hut,  takes  the  bridegroom  by  the  hand and  leads  him  to  the  bride's  carpet,  and  having  seated  him  on  it, without  speaking,  presents  him  with  five  or  six  iron  headed  arrows, and  then  returns  to  his  hut  leaving  the  newly  married  couple  alone, M-ho  remain  sitting  on  the  carpet  for  several  hours  longer,  in  perfect silence,  until  it  be  quite  dark,  when  they  retire  to  their  private residence.
In  Tewari's  case  there  was  not  even  the  ceremony  of  the  arrows, but,  without  a  word  being  said  upon  the  subject,  he  was  seated  by Pooteah,  one  fine  evening,  between  Leepa  and  Heera,  to  whom  the chief  pointed  with  his  hand,  and  addressing  the  young  man  observed "Jirie.Tog"!  and  left  the  spot  immediately.  They  were  not  even painted  (complains  Tewari),  nor  was  the  least  fuss  made  about  them.
Tewari  gives  the  following  outline  of  the  daily  life  of  the  Anda- manese.
The  women  remain  in  the  encampment  cooking  and  making fishing  nets,  while  the  men  hunt  pigs  in  the  jungle ;  the  former  have often  to  go  several  miles  for  fresh  water,  which  they  carry  in  large bamboos  two  at  a  time  from  six  to  nine  feet  long,  and  weighing about  80  to  100  Ibs. ;  all  the  interior  partitions  of  the  bamboo,  save the  last,  having  been  destroyed  by  the  introduction  of  a  smaller  stick. They  also  catch  shell-fish,  and  the  fish  that  the  receding  tide  leaves  in the  pools,  with  their  hand  nets.  The  aborigines  do  not  allow  a particle  of  hair  to  remain  on  them,  and  the  females,  acting  as  barbers, shave  them  cleanly  and  quickly  with  a  small  chip  of  bottle  glass  (the spoil  probably  from  some  shipwreck,  or  lucky  raid  upon  the  Settle- ment) of  the  size  of  a  bean,  but  as  thin  as  the  blade  of  a  penknife  ; the  piece  of  glass  is  struck  sharply  on  the  edge  with  a  hard  stone  to chip  it  thus  finely.
Red  earth  mixed  with  turtle  oil  seems  to  be  the  Andamanese panacea  for  all  diseases.  The  whole  body  of  both  sexes  is  tattooed,
2o  2
28A
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
except  the  head,  neck,  hands,  feet,  and  the  lower  part  of  the  abdo- men, by  being  incised  with  small  pieces  of  bottle  glass ;  the  operation is  performed  by  the  women,  on  children  of  eight  or  ten,  during January,  February,  March,  or  April.  These  months  are  selected because  they  form  the  wild  fruit  season,  wherein  there  is  no  necessity for  the  children  to  go  into  the  salt  water  after  fish,  which  would render  the  tattoo  wounds  painful.  The  operation  is  done  by  degrees and  takes  two  or  three  years  to  complete.  White  earth  (like  lime) is  smeared  over  the  wounds,  which  heal  in  three  to  four  weeks.  No colouring  matter  being  inserted,  the  effect  is  to  make  them  of  a  paler hue  than  the  surrounding  skin.
The  women  rub  the  men  with  earth  and  water  in  the  evening  to keep  off  the  mosquitos,  but  do  not  pay  so  much  attention  to  their comforts  generally,  says  Tewdri,  as  Bengali  wives.  They  carry  their children  in  slings  made  from  the  inner  bark  of  trees,  and  behind their  backs.  They  cut  green  leaves  for  bedding,  and  palm  leaves  for thatching  the  huts,  with  the  sharp  shell  called  Uta,  with  which  also they  sharpen  their  arrows.  They  occupy  old  huts,  if  they  can ;  nor need  we  wonder,  since  four  days  is  a  long  residence  for  these  gentry in  any  spot,  and  hut  building  is  hard  work  for  the  ladies.
Dudhnath  Tewari,  judging  by  his  own  height,  which  is  five  feet nine  and  a  half  inches,  conjectures  the  native  males  to  be  about  five feet  five  inches,  and  the  females  five  feet  two  inches,  in  height  ;  nor did  he  ever  meet  with  any  so  tall  as  himself.  The  men  and  women are  so  alike  in  feature  that  from  the  face  alone  their  sex  cannot  be determined  ;  but  they  are  both  what  would  be  considered  in  Hindu- stan (says  Tewari)  exceedingly  ugly.  •  So  healthy  and  strong  are  the females,  that  the  day  after  child-birth  they  are  able  to  accompany  the troop  on  foot  as  usual.  The  ne\v-born  babe  is  drenched  in  cold  fresh water,  audits  wet  body  dried  by  the  hand  heated  over  a  fire,  quickly and  gently.  Any  woman  who  is  suckling  takes  the  new  born  child for  a  day  or  two  and  feeds  it.  The  child  remains  without  any  cover- ing whatever  like  the  parents,  unless  it  rains,  when  a  few  leaves  are sewn,  with  rattan  for  thread,  and  placed  around  it.
The  reason   of  Tewari's   leaving   Andaman  society  was  that  he
\UTH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  285
miglit  give  information  of  an  intended  attack  by  the  savages  upon the  convict  station  at  Aberdeen.  He  did  so — travelling  with  the attacking  party  along  the  sea  coast — and  set  Dr.  Walker  on  his  guard, but  just  in  time.
His  wife  Leepa  was  left  in  an  interesting  condition.
Remarks. — There  is  much  in  the  above  statement  which  is  cor- rect, and  it  appears  to  me  to  be  the  account  of  his  adventures  by  an ignorant  man,  who  related  correctly  what  he  remembered,  exaggerated greatly  when  asked  regarding  matters  to  which  he  had  paid  no  parti- cular attention,  and  only  invented  when  feeling  obliged  by  continual questioning  to  give  some  answer  about  matters  of  which  he  knew  no- thing.
As  regards  his  marriage, —
He  was  certainly  married  to  Lipaia,  but  Jidga  was  a  girl  about twelve,  who  was  not  considered  to  be  his  wife.  The  Andamanese  have been  asked  regarding  his  statement,  and  they  corroborate  much  of what  he  says.  Pooteah  told  him  that  the  young  woman  Lipaia  was  a "  Jadi  Jog  "  or  "  Spinster,"  and  gave  him  a  broad  hint  at  tlie  same time  that  he  was  welcome  to  her  as  a  wife,  but  no  attempt  was  made to  marry  the  couple  after  the  Andamanese  fashion,  the  whole  of  which is  wrongly  related.  The  Andamanese  never  have  two  wives  at  the same  time,  and  Dudhnath  wrongly  describes  a  part  of  the  ceremony, mistaking  the  part  for  the  whole.
He  only  wandered  over  a  portion  of  the  South  Andaman,  meeting with  different  Septs  of  the  same  Tribe,  and  his  remarks  as  to  their numbers,  as  well  as  to  their  height,  are  great  exaggerations.  He  was acquainted  with  the  existence  of  firemtaga  tribes,  and  speaks  correctly of  them,  though  evidently  having  little  knowledge  of  their  ways,  yet in  this  matter  he  was  in  advance  of  his  time,  as  the  existence  of  these tribes  was  net  generally  recognised  till  about  1879.
The  reasons  he  gives  for  the  different  actions  of  the  Andamanese are  often  incorrect,  but  his  observations  on  their  habits  are  fairly  ac- curate.
On  the  whole,  I  see  no  just  ground  for  the  unsparing  abuse  which
286  A  HISTORY  OF  OTJB  RELATIONS
has  been  heaped  on  this  man  by  other  writers  ;  many  of  his  statements are  inaccurate  in  details,  but  the  statements  of  those  who  vilify  him are  the  same.
The  attacks  by  the  Andamanese,  particularly  when  of  such  mag- nitude as  "  the  Battle  of  Aberdeen,"  and  showing  such  implacable hostility  and  power  of  organisation  against  the  Settlement  on  a  large scale,  became  a  serious  feature  in  the  administration,  and  had  to  be reckoned  for  in  all  arrangements  made.
On  the  evening  of  the  27th  June,  1859,  convict  Boorhana, No.  2622,  who  escaped  with  three  others  on  the  23rd  of  March,  returned and  stated  that  one  of  his  companions  was  killed  by  the  aborigines, and  the  two  others  were  then  living  with  the  savages  on  Rutland Island  and  refused  to  return.  This  convict  further  stated  that  his reason  for  returning  was  to  give  notice  that  the  aborigines  on  Rutland Island  intended  to  attack  Ross  Island,  and  had  collected  1,000  armed men,  and  constructed  500  canoes.  Dr.  Walker  questioned  the  man's veracity,  but  the  convict  added  that  500  canoes  are  now  ready,  in addition  to  about  100  used  for  fishing,  and  their  construction  is  pro- ceeding at  the  rate  of  12  to  16  per  diem.  He  said  that  the  attack might  be  expected  within  a  few  days.
As  it  would  be  dangerous  to  send  a  sailing  vessel  on  the  Western coast  during  the  south-west  monsoon,  Dr.  Walker  was  unable  to  test the  truth  of  the  man's  statement.  All  precautions  were  taken,  and preparations  to  resist  the  attack  made.  Dr.  Walker  noted  that,  if  the Settlement  is  liable  to  attacks  by  water,  it  would  be  necessary  to  sup- ply him  with  a  small  steamer.
It  is  easy  for  us  now  to  see  that  the  above  report  was  false.  Dudh- nath  had  a  short  time  before  been  locally  pardoned  for  escaping,  and further  recommended  for  absolute  release,  because  he  came  in,  and  by a  timely  and  true  warning  saved  the  Settlement  from  an  unexpected and  dangerous  attack ;  and  this  man,  who  had  probably  been  lurking in  the  vicinity  of  the  Settlement  and  picking  up  news  from  his  friends, hoped  to  do  the  same.  It  would  naturally  alarm  Dr.  Walker,  who could  not  be  expected  to  know  how  false  the  statement  was.
WITH  THE  ANUAMANESE.  267
The  following  statement  by  the  same  convict  is  probably  equally false.  He  said  that,  about  six  weeks  before,  a  Turkish  ship's  boat, painted  red  outside  and  green  inside,  and  having  a  crescent  painted on  one  bow,  with  21  Hindustani  and  two  Cabuli  shipwrecked  pilgrims on  board,  was  picked  up,  while  drifting  out  at  sea  off  the  west  coast of  "Rutland  Island,  by  the  aborigines  on  the  west  coast,  in  the  south- west monsoon.  The  savages  treated  the  msn  kindly  in  their  distressed condition,  and  continued  to  do  so  up  to  the  time  the  convict  left.
The  convict  stated  that  tho  pilgrims  had  left  "  Abooshuhm  "  in  a Turkish  vessel  bound  for  some  porfc  en  route  to  Mecca,  and  after  sail- ing for  about  two  months,  the  vessel  was  caught  in  a  severe  storm which  lasted  two  days,  during  which  she  struck  upon  a  rock  and  cap- sized.
It  is  supposed  that  out  of  some  hundreds,  mostly  pilgrims,  on board,  all  perished  except  the  23  who  were  with  the  Andamaneseon Rutland  Island.  These  were  only  saved  by  catching  hold  of  the vessel's  boat  which  had  got  adrift.  After  a  voyage  of  18  days  with- out food,  but  with  plenty  of  rain  water  to  drink,  they  drifted  to  the west  coast  of  Rutland  Island.  For  the  first  four  days  they  pulled eight  oars,  without  knowing  where  they  were  goiug,  they  then  sighted high  land,  but  their  strength  failing  they  drifted.  The  convict  only remembered  three  of  the  pilgrims'  names.
1.  Meeah  Allah  Yar,  Moulvi  o£  Delhi.     A  very  corpulent  person, 80  years  of  age,  with  the  cicatrix  of  a  wound  an  inch  in  length    on the  right  side  of  the  brow,  caused  when  a  boy,  by  a  fall  down  the  steps of  the  Jumma  Musjid  at  Delhi.     The  Moulvi  has  with  him  a  small box  containing  the  Koran,  500  rupees  in  silver,  and  some  writing materials.
2.  Futtah,  a  Mujawar  of  the  Jumma  Musjid  of  Delhi.
3.  Munna,  only  known  as  a  Fakir.
Dr.  Walker  could  render  these  people  no  assistance  even  if  the tale  were  true.  He  offered  two  convicts  free  pardons  if  they  could succeed,  by  giving  presents  to  the  aborigines,  in  bringing  these  people into  the  Settlement.  The  convicts  would  not  undertake  the  mission,
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
as  from  their  knowledge  of  the  savages  they  considered  it  hopeless   for the  pilgrims,  and  certain  death  for  themselves.
Dr.  "Walker's  only  hope  was  that,  should  any  aborigines  be  taken prisoners  in  any  attack  he  might  have  to  repel,  he  would  try  to  pro- cure the  pilgrims  by  effecting  an  exchange.
The  above  story  seems  plausible,  but  I  doubt  whether  at  that  time convicts  could  safely  go  to  and  from  Eutland  Island,  as,  in  addition to  the  difficulty  of  crossing  McPherson's  Straits  during  the  South- West  Monsoon,  there  were  three  Tribes  of  Andamanese  to  be  reckoned with,  each  speaking  a  different  language,  and  being  hostile  to  each other.  The  Andamanese  whom  I  have  consulted  have  no  recollection of  such  a  wreck  having  occurred,  and  say  that,  had  any  pilgrims landed,  they  would  have  been  at  once  massacred.
The  story  of  the  500  canoes  is  utterly  ridiculous.
On  the  26th  March,  1859,  Dr.  Walkei1,  having  been  promoted  to the  rank  of  Surgeon  in  the  Army,  resigned  his  appointment  as  Super- intendent of  Port  Blair,  stating  his  health  was  so  broken  with  the worry  of  the  Settlement  work  and  the  effects  of  the  malarious  cli- mate, that  he  urgently  required  a  change.
On  the  29th  July,  1859,  Captain  J.  C.  Haughton,  of  the  S4th Native  Infantry,  was  appointed  by  the  Government  of  India  to  succeed Dr.  Walker.
Captain  Haughton  was  then  attached  to  the  Moulmein  Commis- sion, and  was  the  Magistrate  who  had  investigated  the  case  of  the murder  of  some  of  the  Chinese  crew  of  the  junk  Fuen  Gren  by  the Andamanese,  as  related  in  Chapter  VI,  in  February,  1856.
He  was  unable  to  join  the  appointment  at  once,  as  will  be  shown, but  took  over  charge  from  Dr.  Walker  on  the  3rd  October,  1859.
Dr.  Walker,  when  leaving,  must  have  had  much  satisfaction  in knowing  that  he  had  given  so  energetic  a  start  to  the  Penal  Settle- ment.
Had  he  been  able  to  devote  more  time  personally  to  the  aborigines, he  might  have  possibly  commenced  a  friendly  intercourse  with them,  but  harassed  as  he  was  with  work,  and  having  little  assistance,
UITH  THE  ANDAMANESK.  289
this  could  not  be  expected.    The  hostility    of,  and    fights  with,  the Andamanese  were  only  what  might  have  been  anticipated,    and  these, at  such  an  energetic  opening  of  the  Settlement,   no  one    could  have averted.
The  Andamanese  were  naturally  alarmed  and  enraged  at  the manner  in  which  their  country  was  being  cleared  and  appropriated on  all  sides,  and  the  conflicts  with  the  convicts,  and  with  the  Naval Guard,  in  which  the  latter  were  the  aggressors,  only  increased  that alarm.
It  must  also  be  remembered  in  contrasting  this  with  the  opening  of Blair's  Settlement  in  1789,  that  Lieutenant  Blair  had  principally  to deal  with  the  more  peaceable  and  timid  Jarawa  Tribe,  who  since  then appear  to  have  become  fewer  in  number  and  feebler,  being  probably gradually  ousted  from  the  harbour  by  the  fierce  and  numerous  Septs of  the  Aka-_B(?a-da.
Dr.  Walker  had  the  latter  to  deal  with,  and  even  Lieutenant  Blair was  unable  to  make  anything  of  them,  for  his  friendly  relations  were only  with  the  people  on  the  south  side  of  the  harbour  (shown  by Colebrooke's  paper  to  have  been  Jarawas),  and  he  suffered  from  attacks by  the  Aka-jfte'a-da  who  lived  on  the  north  side.
Lieutenant  Blair's  clearings  also  were  nothing  like  so  extensive as  Dr.  Walker's.
590
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
CHAPTER  IX.
Captain  Haughton  visits  Penang  and  Atcheen  to  look  for  Andamanese — Anda- manese  in  Siam — Captain  Haughton's  reforming  and  enlightened  policy — Anda- manese  behave  better — Cyclone — Naval  Guard  attacked  by  Andamanese — Captain Haughton's  Report  on  the  Andamaneee — Dr.  Gamack  and  Lieutenant  Hellard  began to  make  friends  with  the  Andamanese — Dudhnath  Tewari  released — Andamanese at  South  Point — Andamanese  landed  on  Viper  Island,  and  were  friendly — Change in  their  attitude — Petty  attacks — Further  visits  of  the  Andamanese  to  Viper  Island — Fight  on  Viper  Island  with  the  Andamanese — Some  Andamanese  taken  prisoners  on Viper  Island — Further  attacks — Captain  Haughton  decided  to  send  some  of  the Andamanese  prisoners  to  Burmah  for  a  time,  and  the  Government  of  India  approved — > Colonel  Fytche's  remarks  on  the  Andamanese  sent  to  Burmah — Malay  Prows  seen near  the  Archipelago  Islands — Remaining  Andamanese  prisoners  released— -Account of  them — Further  attacks  by  the  Andamanese— The  Andamanese  returned  from Moulmein — Extracts  from  the  Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  regarding  the  Anda- manese— Vocabulary — Colonel  A.  Fytche's  notes  on  the  Andamanese — Major Tickell's  notes  on  the  Andamanese  under  his  charge  at  Moulmein,  and  Vocabulary — Captain  Haughton  examines  the  Islands,  and  discovers  "  Kwang  Tung  "  Harbour— Edible  birds'  nest  collectors'  reports — Major  Haughton  proceeds  on  leave,  and Lieutenant-Colonel  R.  C.  Tytler  becomes  Officiating  Superintendent  of  Port  Blair- Notes  on  the  vocabularies  collected  by  Major  Hanghton.
BOTH  the  Government  of  India  and  Captain  Haughton  seem  at this  time  to  have  heen  so  much  impressed  by  the  importance  of  the establishment  of  friendly  relations  with  the  Andamanese  that,  on the  latter  receiving  his  appointmsnt  to  the  Superintendentship  of Port  Blair,  he  was  directed  by  the  Government  of  India  to  visit  tlie Straits  Settlements  and  Atcheen,  before  proceeding  to  his  post,  in order  to  ascertain  whether  any  Andamanese  were  resident  there  as slaves,  etc. ;  and  whether,  if  any  such  people  were  to  be  found,  the services  of  one  or  more  of  them  could  be  engaged  as  interpreters.
He  arrived  at  Penang  in  the  Pluto  on  the  23rd  September,  1859, and  at  once  put  himself  in  communication  with  Mr.  Lewis,  the  Resi- dent Councillor,  who  gave  him  every  assistance.
He  learnt  that  on  two  occasions,  eighteen  or  twenty  years  before, natives  of  the  Andavnans  had  been  brought  to  Peuang;  in  one  case the  Andamanese  was  a  slave  captured  by  the  Malays,  and  in  the
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  £91
other,  some  people  were   picked  up   at  sea  drifting  helplessly   in  a canoe.
Of  all  of  these  but  one  person,  a  female  who  had  been  picked  up at  sea,  survived.  Captain  Haughton  saw  her  and  states  that  she  was then  a  servant  in  the  family  of  Mr.  Mitchell,  Chief  Clerk  of  the Police.
She  had  been  carefully  brought  up  at  an  English  School  and spoke  English  perfectly,  but  had  lost  all  knowledge  of  her  own  lan- guage. When  asked  if  she  would  like  to  revisit  her  country,  she  at once  expressed  her  wish  to  do  so,  if  she  could  get  "  a  good  place  " there.  She  was  however  too  valuable  a  servant  to  her  employers  to be  lightly  parted  with.  Of  course,  for  the  purpose  wanted  she  would have  been  useless,  and  she  was  therefore  not  taken.
(This  is  the  female  referred  to  by  Mr.  Rodyk,  and  mentioned  in Chapter  V.)
Captain  Haughton  states  that  he  mentions  the  above  details  "  as "  they  tend  to  show  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  Andaman  Islands  are "  not  so  low  in  the  scale  of  humanity  as  to  be  incapable  oE  a  consider- able amount  of  civilisation."
He  also  mentions  a  rumour  he  heard  from  Mr.  Lewis,  that  two natives  of  the  Andaman  Islands  had  been  recently  picked  up  at  sea by  the  Emma  and  had  been  forwarded  to  Calcutta  in  the  Gliinsurah. On  a  further  enquiry  being  made  into  this  matter,  it  was  found  that the  two  men,  who  were  subsequently  returned  to  their  own  country, were  Nicobarese,  thus  showing  how  the  two  peoples  were  confounded even  so  lately  as  1859.
Nothing  more  regarding  the  Andamanese  could  be  learnt  at Penang,  so  Captain  Haughton  left  for  Atcheen  on  the  26th  Septem- ber, arriving  there  on  the  28th.
Here,  although  provided  with  a  letter  to  the  Sultan  from  the Viceroy  of  India,  he  was  received  with  much  discourtesy,  and  was not  admitted  to  an  interview  with  him;  he  however  learnt  privately that  there  were  no  Andamanese  at  Atcheen,  so  left  that  place  on  the evening  of  the  29th,  and  arrived  at  Port  Blair  on  the  morning  of  the 3rd  October.
2P2
292  A  HISTORY  OF  ODE  RELATIONS
The  reason  given  by  Captain  Haughton  for  the  discourtesy  he received  from  the  Sultan  of  Atcheen  was,  that  that  Ruler  believed that  the  English  had  suffered  severe  loss,  if  not  complete  defeat,  in India  during  the  Mutiny,  and  also  that  they  were  at  war  with  the Continental  Powers  in  Europe.  He  adds  that  Atcheen  was  the  resort of  all  the  pilgrim  vessels  to  and  from  Mecca  and  the  various  Malay Islands  and  Principalities,  and  this  agrees  with  the  remarks  by Hamilton  in  "  Pinkerton's  Voyages  "  quoted  in  Chapter  III.
The  Malay  pilot  who  accompanied  Captain  Haughton  from  Penang to  Atcheen  informed  him  that  he  had,  on  two  different  occasions, accompanied  expeditions  from  Penang  to  the  Andaman  Islands  for  the express  purpose  of  obtaining  Andamanese  for  sale  at  Junk  Ceylon  to the  Raja  theres  who  required  them  as  a  rarity,  for  presentation  to  the Court  of  Siam.  Captain  Haughton  remarks  on  this  : —
"It  is  probable  that  some  persons  who  were  carried  off  are  to  be found  in  Bangkok.  I  do  not  however  anticipate  that,  even  if  their services  could  be  obtained,  they  would  be  of  much  use,  ns  it  appears probable  that  Siamese  would  be  the  only  foreign  dialect  known  to them.  I  shall  however  make  enquiry  on  the  subject  through  the medium  of  Sir  R>.  Schomberg"  (who  was  then  our  Minister  at  the Court  of  Siam).
The  result  of  this  enquiry  was  that  Captain  Haughton  was  in- formed that  the  statements  of  the  Malay  pilot  were  correct,  and  that there  were  several  Andamanese  at  Bangkok.  Nothirg  further  seems to  have  been  done  in  the  matter.
All  this  throws  a  light  on  the  state  of  the  Andamanese  and  gives an  excellent  reason  for  their  hostility  to  all  comers.  Naturally  a pleasant,  good-humoured,  and  gentle  race,  they  were  driven  to  des- peration by  the  ill-treatment  they  received  from  strangers,  and  ac- quired in  self-defence  a  cruelty  and  ferocity  originally  foreign  to  their natures.
On  taking  over  charge  of  the  Penal  Settlement  Captain  Haughton found  that  the  escapes  of  the  convicts  were  still  very  numerous, though  during  his  term  of  office,  owing  to  his  milder  method  of
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  293
treatment  and  his  general  kindness,  they  gradually  became  fewer. Ho  appears  to  have  been  an  officer  singularly  well  adapted  naturally for  the  work  he  had  to  do,  was  idolised  by  the  convicts  under  him, and  is  even  now  (1895)  spoken  of  with  affection  by  the  few  still remaining,  who  were  with  him,  or  who  arrived  shortly  after  ho  left, and  who  looked  up  to  "  John  Haughton's  "  days  as  an  Ago  of  Gold. His  policy  towards  the  convicts  was  reforming  rather  than  repressive, and  with  him  grew  up  the  system  which  has  made  the  Penal  Settle- ment of  Port  Blair  what  it  is  now  considered ;  i.e.,  the  first  Reforming Penal  Settlement  in  the  world,  and  perhaps  the  only  one  from  which, as  a  rule,  the  convicts  on  their  release  return  to  India  better  citizens than  when  they  left  it.  Captain  Haughton  was  allowed  a  Deputy Superintendent  (Mr.  Walter,  from  the  Tenasserim  Provinces),  who could  occasionally  relieve  him  of  his  duties  in  Port  Blair  and  enable him  to  cruise  about  among  the  Islands  and  make  the  acquaintance of  the  Andamanese  in  their  undisturbed  haunts.  He  appears  to  have known  more  of  the  Islands  than  any  Superintendent  until  Colonel Cadell  came  in  1879,  and  some  of  our  "  discoveries  "  (!)  of  later  years I  find  to  be  only  "re-discoveries"  of  what  Captain  Haughton  had already  found  out.
Both  he  and  Mr.  Walter,  being  from  the  Tenasserim   Provinces, where  the  climate  and  the  nature  of  the  jungle  is  much  the  same as  that  in  the  Andamans,  were  able  to  form  a  juster  estimate  of  the way  in  which  the  Islands  should  be   opened  out,  than  Dr.  Walker, with  only  Upper  Indian  experience,  could.     Captain  Haughton  stop- ped the  large  and  indiscriminate  clearing  of  jungle  for  health's  sake, which  was  being  so  energetically  pushed  on  by  Dr.  Walker,  for,   as he  pointed  out,  the  land  cleared,  if  unattended  to  (and  such  attention would  involve  the  employment  of  a   large  number  of  men,  and  be a  mere  waste  of  labour),  would  lapse  in  a  few  years  into  a  dense  mass of  secondary  jungle:  he  therefore  only  cleared  such  land  as   was   re- quired for  building,  etc.,  or  could  be  at  once  placed  under  cultivation, and  thus  did  not  give  such  offence  to  the  Andamanese  by  spoiling their  hunting  grounds.
He  looked  upon  the  establishment  of  friendly  relations  with  the
294  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
aborigines  as  one  of  the  most  important  of  his  duties,  and  by  great tact  and  kindness  was  able  to  do  much  in  this  direction.
Towards  the  end  of  1869  the  Andamanese  began  to  refrain  from indiscriminately  massacring  all  the  runaway  convicts  they  met  with, and  contented  themselves  with  looting  them  of  all  the  metal  they  had, only  wounding  them  if  they  resisted  or  ran  away.
On  the  13th  November,  1859,  of  some  escaped  convicts  who  Lad returned,  several  had  been  wounded  by  the  Andamanese,  who  in every  case  took  away  their  brass  pots  and  the  iron  rings  off  their legs.  One  convict  was  very  severely  bitten  in  the  hand  in  his  strug- gle to  keep  his  brass  pot,  and  this  man  afterwards  committed  suicide, by  hanging  himself,  as  he  was  afraid  of  losing  his  hand  by  mortifica- tion !
Cases  occurred  of  runaways  actually  being  kept  for  a  short  time by  the  Andamanese,  and  being  well  fed  by  them  on  pork.  The  Anda- manese  may  have  had  some  idea  of  getting  the  convicts  to  make common  cause  with  them  against  the  Government.
On  the  1st  December,  1859,  the  Settlement  was  visited  by  a cyclone  which  rose  suddenly  with  a  north  wind  at  noon  and  blew  with intense  fury  till  8  P.M.  It  then  ceased  altogether  for  a  short  time (while  the  centra  was  passing  over  the  Settlement),  and  recom- menced with  a  wind  of  equal  fury  from  the  south-west.  The  force of  the  storm  moderated  about  midnight,  and  before  the  following morning  entirely  ceased.  Captain  Haughton  described  the  scene  of destruction  which  presented  itself  as  being  most  melancholy  and disheartening : —
'  The  plantain  trees,  about  12,000  in  number,  were  everywhere laid,  low ;  giant  trees,  between  one  and  two  hundred  feet  in  height, were  thrown  down  or  snapped  in  half;  the  Naval  Barracks,  °the Superintendent's  bungalow,  and  the  hospital  on  Chatham  Island were  unroofed ;  the  convict  buildings  on  Viper  Island,  with  the exception  of  one  new  barrack,  were  prostrated  ;  and  the  convicts' huts  in  every  station  were  either  thrown  down  or  greatly  injured.
'  The  Nemesis  at  an  early  period  of  the  storm,  finding  that she  was  dragging  her  anchors,  steamed  up  into  the  Inner  Harbour.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
295
The  gun-boat  attempted  to  follow  her,  and,  I  grieve  to  say,  was thrown  on  the  rocks.  I  believe  that  the  extreme  suddenness  with which  the  gale  arose  rendered  this  accident  unavoidable."  (She  was eventually  floated  off  and  repaired.)
One  European  of  the  Naval  Brigade  was  very  severely  injured and  one  convict  was  killed  by  the  falling  of  a  tree.
The  Nemesis  was  sent  along  the  coast  to  look  for   wrecks,  but none  were  found.
The  following  remark  of  Captain  Haughton's  is  of  interest,  as showing  how  little  the  natural  products  of  the  islands  and  the  sea were  utilised  at  that  time  : —
;t  Burmese,  Malays,  and  Chinese  are  the  only  people  who  could exist  here  as  free  settlers.  They  will  live  and  thrive  where  the natives  of  India  would  starve.  la  illustration  of  this,  I  may  mention that  the  Burmese  and  Chinese  convicts  last  received  had  only  been a  day  or  two  here  when,  on  visiting  their  quarters,  I  learned  they  had found  a  turtle's  ne^t  and  obtained  150  eggs.  I  also  found  here  a heap  of  shells  of  ohms,  cockles,  etc.,  plainly  indicating  some  hearty meals,  and  in  a  day  or  two  afterwards  they  captured  a  very  large turtle — all  events  unheard  of  before  their  arrival  here."
During  December,  1859,  Captain  Haughton  visited  Rutland  Island with  a  view  to  render  assistance  to  the  shipwrecked  people  mentioned by  Dr.  Walker  as  being  there.  He  took  with  him  the  convicts  who had  brought  the  information  regarding  them,  and  landed  on  the  spot where  they  were  said  to  have  been  last  seen,  but  could  find  no  traces of  them.
On  the  27th  December,  1839,  a  boat  from  the  Send™  was engaged  in  taking  in  water  at  Watering  Cove.  When  the  work  was nearly  completed,  one  of  the  Europeans  of  the  Naval  Guard,  who  was sitting  close  to  a  bush,  was  suddenly  attacked  from  below  by  eight or  nine  of  the  aborigines,  who  wounded  him  somewhat  severely3  in two  places  before  he  could  make  any  defence.  The  remainder  of  the guard  immediately  fired  on  the  natives,  one  of  whom  was  wouuded,
2QG  A  HISTORY  OF  OTTR  RELATIONS
but   got  away.     A  lascar  who   was   filling  a  water  cask  received  a trifling  wound,  and  the  Andamanese  ran  away.
As  this  outrage  was  entirely  without  provocation,  Captain  Haugh- ton  was  anxious  to  punish  the  Andamanese  for  it,  if  possible,  and proceeded  to  Watering  Cove  with  that  intention.  He  could  not, however,  find  any  one.  He  then  reported  to  the  Government  of India : —
"  4.  Having  in  view  the  orders  of  Government  issued  to  my  pre- decessor, I  think  it  desirable  to  state  here  the  rules  I  have  laid  do?vn for  the  guidance  of  myself,  and  of  those  subordinate  to  me  at  this place,  on  the  subject  of  contact  with  the  aborigines.
"  5.  Looking  to  the  fact  that  the  aborigines  of  these  islands  are probably  the  most  ignorant  of  mankind,  aud  that  they  have  had hitherto  but  too  good  cause  to  look  upon  the  rest  of  the  human  race as  their  enemies,  owing  to  the  universal  practice  of  carrying  them  off whenever  opportunity  offered,  I  have  determined  to  use  my  best endeavours  to  avoid  all  aggression  upon  them,  and,  in  the  event  of any  opening  occurring,  to  endeavour  to  conciliate  them.
"  6.  I  have,  therefore,  directed  that  they  should  never  be  molested, except  when  plainly  intending  to  attack  our  Settlement  or  parties, I  have  discountenanced  also  all  visits  to  places  which  they  are  known to  frequent,  and  I  have  even  withheld  from  sending  out  exploring expeditions  likely  to  bring  us  in  contact  with  them.
"  7.  On  the  other  hand,  I  conceive  it  a  duty  to  the  servants  of Government,  and  the  convicts  exposed  to  their  attacks,  to  punish sharply  and  promptly  any  unprovoked  attack  by  them  on  the  Settle- ment, and  in  this  view  have  directed  that  whenever  seen  attempting to  enter  our  Settlement  by  stealth,  or  openly  in  a  body,  if  armed, they  are  to  be  fired  upon.  I  have  offered  in  such  case  a  reward  of Us.  100  for  each  captured  alive.  I  may  mention  that  one  of  the arrows  fired  at  our  men  was  tip  ped  with  a  piece  of  steel  which  must have  been  obtained  during  the  attack  of  the  6th  April  last."
To  this  declaration  of  policy  the  Government  of  India  replied  iu
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESK.
letter  No.  436  of  the  1st  March,   1860,  from  the  Secretary  of   the Home  Department : —
"  2.  I  am  directed  to  inform  you  that  the  President  in  Council entirely  approves  of  the  determination  you  express  in  the  5th  para- graph of  your  letter,  to  iise  your  best  endeavours  to  avoid  all  aggres- sion upon  the  aborigines,  and  in  the  event  of  any  opening,  to  endea- vour to  conciliate  thsm ;  and  His  Honor  in  Council  considers  that the  line  of  conduct  indicated  in  paragraph  6  of  your  letter  afford the  best  security  against  collision.  The  President  in  Council  does not  despair  that,  acting  in  the  spirit  of  the  resolution  expressed  in these  two  paragraphs  of  your  letter,  you  may  ultimately  be  able  to allay  the  suspicious  hostility  of  the  aborigines,  and  pave  the  way towards  rendering  them  harmless,  if  not  useful  neighbours.
"  As  it  is  possible  that  some  of  the  convicts  who  have,  while  at large,  lived  with  the  aborigines,  may  be  made  the  means  of  opening a  more  friendly  intercourse  with  them,  His  Honor  in  Council  desires me  to  state  that  you  may  consider  yourself  at  liberty  to  adopt  any measures  which  may  seem  to  you  calculated  to  promote  this  very desirable  end.
With  regard  to  paragraph  7  of  your  letter,  I  have  to  state that  it  is  not  the  wish  of  the  Government  of  India  to  interfere  with any  regulations  which  may  be  really  necessary  for  the  safety  of  the convicts  or  other  inhabitants  of  the  Settlement ;  but  it  seems  to  the President  in  Council  open  to  doubt  whether  the  orders  which  you have  given  to  fire  on  all  armed  bodies  of  natives,  and  the-reward offered  for  their  apprehension  alive,  may  not  lead  to  collisions  and encourage  kidnapping,  which  would  appear  to  have  been  one  of  the original  causes  of  the  hostility  of  the  natives."
During  the  year  1860  some  faint  signs  of  a  commencement  of friendly  relations  with  the  Andamanese  were  observed.  Dr.  Gamack took  an  interest  in  the  matter,  and  considered  that  the  people  living in  the  harbour  were  becoming  more  peaceable,  though  when  he  went to  North  Point  on  the  23rd  March,  1860,  he  met  with  some  new Andamanese  who  fired  on  and  wounded  him.
2  o
298  A  HISTORY  OF  OCR  RELATIONS
On  the  28th  May,  Lieutenant  Hellard,  I.N.,  who  was  cruising  off the  Archipelago  Islands,  observed  a  large  fire  on  Rose  Island,  and saw  about  fifteen  Andamanese  there.  He  did  not  approach  them, and  no  collision  took  place.
Captain  Haughton  recommended  that,  as  the  Andamanese  seemed to  be  more  peacefully  inclined,  the  station  of  Haddo,  which  had  been abandoned  on  account  of  their  attacks,  should  be  re-occupied.
The  Government  of  India  read  Lieutenant  Hellard's  and  Dr. Gamack's  letters  on  this  subject  with  interest.  They  directed  that the  friendly  disposition,  now  for  the  first  time  shown,  should  be  ex- tended, but  that  every  precaution  should  be  taken  to  ensure  the safety  of  those  who  held  intercourse  with  the  Andamanese,  and  people must  on  no  account  place  themselves  in  their  power.
With  regard  to  the  attack  upon  Dr.  Gamack  and  his  crew  by  the Andamanese,  the  President  in  Council  regretted  that  Dr.  Gamack's natural  eagerness  to  follow  up  the  successful  commencement  he  had made  in  opening  friendly  relations  with  the  savages  should  have  led him  to  expose  himself  and  his  men  so  incautiously.  At  the  same time,  he  directed  that  further  efforts,  with  caution,  should  be  made to  tame  the  savages.
(Captain  Haughton  seems  to  have  been  singularly  fortunate  in having  two  such  officers  as  Lieutenant  Hellard  and  Dr.  Gamack  to assist  him  in  this  work.)
In  June,  I860,  Captain  Haughton  called  the  attention  of  the Government  of  India  to  the  case  of  Dudhnath  Tewari,  which  appeared to  have  been  overlooked,  and  asked  for  his  absolute  release.
Dudhnath,  since  his  return  from  his  sojourn  with  them,  had  often been  pressed  to  go  out  and  head  a  party  to  capture  Andamanese, but  had  refused  to  trust  himself  amongst  them.
To  this  the  Government  of  India  replied,  in  letter  No.  2204  from the  Home  Department,  dated  5th  October,  1860  : —
"  In  consideration  of  the  behaviour  of  Life  Convict  Dudhndth Tewari,  who,  after  being  with  the  aborigines  of  the  Andaman  Islands for  upwards  of  a  year,  returned  to  give  warning  of  an  attack  which
WITH   THE   ANDAMANESE.
299
they  had  planned  to  make  upon  the  station  at  Aberdeen,  at  Atalanta Point,  the  Governor  General  in   Council  is  pleased  to  comply  with your  recommendation  in  his  favour,  and  to  grant  him  a   free   pardon. He  should  be  released  and  sent  up  to   Calcutta  by  the  first  oppor- tunity."
On  the  30th  June,  1860,  it  was  reported  that  the  Andamanese appeared  on  the  coast  at  South  Point  and  stole  trifles  from  the  con- victs cutting  bamboos  there,  but  showed  them  no  violence.  A  boat was  sent  out  to  watch  them,  but  they  then  showed  hostility,  though on  a  gun  being  fired  they  ran  away  without  bloodshed.  An  earthen pot  and  a  human  skull  were  found  where  they  had  camped,  and  the latter  had  evidently  been  worn  as  an  ornament.
People  in  those  days  (and  indeed  even  now)  never  seem  to  have realised  that  the  Andamanese  objected  to  strangers  coming  to  their villages  and  taking  away  their  property,  quite  as  much  as  we  should do,  and  that  such  conduct  on  our  part  could  only  provoke  ill-feeling and  hostility  on  theirs.  The  taming  of  the  aborigines  on  the  Little Andaman  was,  at  a  later  date,  much  retarded  by  similar  acts  on  our part,  and  I  noticed  a  great  difference  in  the  behaviour  of  the  savages there  when  once  I  had  enforced  the  order  that,  whatever  encamp- ments might  be  visited,  none  of  the  property  of  the  aborigines  was ever  to  be  touched,  and  presents  were  always  to  be  left  in  all  the huts  we  entered.
Captain  Haughton  wrote  to  the  Government  of  India  on  the  30th June,  1860,  as  follows  :—
"On  the  19th  June  a  party  of  aborigines  landed  in  a  friendly manner  on  Viper  Island,  and  were  met  with  and  well  treated  by Kooshea  Lall,  the  Head  Native  Overseer.
(This  man  seems  to  have  had  considerable  tact ;  and  had  matters been  left  in  his  hands,  and  the  Naval  Guard  sent  off  the  island, probably  the  Andamanese  would  have  become  very  friendly.)
"  The  following  day  a  party  of  sixteen  persons  visited  Viper  Is- land, and  went  all  over  it,  staying  for  some  hours  : —
"  On  the  21st  a  party  of  four  Andamanese  were   passing,  but  a
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
shot  having  been  accidentally  fired  by  one  of  the  European  Guard, they  were  much  frightened.  They  were,  however,  pacified  and  dis- missed in  a  friendly  manner.  The  intercourse  with  these  people  is  a matter  of  extreme  delicacy.  I  shall  endeavour,  however,  to  encourage them  without  running  undue  risks."
The  above  is  noteworthy  as  being  the  first  occasion  on  which friendly  overtures  were  made  by  the  Andamanese,  and  our  relations with  them  began  from  this  time  to  get  on  a  more  intimate  and  better
footing.
The  President  in  Council  expressed  much  satisfaction  at  hearing of  these  occurrences,  and  hoped  that  the  ofticers  of  the  Settlement would  do  their  utmost  to  promote  the  friendly  disposition  which  had been  shown  by  the  Andamanese,  taking  at  the  same  time  all  the precautions  already  enjoined.
The  Secretary  of  State  for  India  "perused  the  papers  regarding the  Andamanese  with  great  interest,  and  trusted  that  the  officers would  do  their  utmost  to  promote  the  friendly  disposition  which  has been  shown  by  the  islanders,  taking  at  the  same  time  all  due  pre- cautions."
On  the  18th  August,  1860,  the  Clyde  visited  the  Middle  Straits and  surveyed  there.  The  party  came  upon  some  Andamanese  who fired  on  them,  but  no  harm  was  done.  Some  iron  wreckage  was  found in  a  hut,  and  some  of  the  Andamanese  were  seen  in  clothing,  from which  it  would  appear  that  they  had  been  wrecking,  though  there were  no  other  signs  of  shipwrecked  persons.
On  the  llth  November,  1860,  Captain  Haughton  reported  that the  demeanour  of  the  Andamanese  had  continued  to  be  generally peaceable.  The  only  violence  done  had  been  a  trifling  injury  to  a convict  by  the  discharge  of  a  wooden  headed  arrow,  because  he  re- fused to  give  up  an  axe  with  which  he  was  cutting  the  jungle.
A  gentleman  who  imprudently  wandered  into  the  jungle  frequent-
ed  by   the  Andamanese  had   had  his  tiffin  annexed,  but  was  not  in-
jured—treatment he  would  certainly  not  have  met  with  a  year  before.
In  December,  I860,  a  party  of  Andamanese  came  upon  some  men
WITH  THE  ANDAMAXfcSE.
of  the  Clyde  who  were  getting  water  at  Bamboo  Flat,  and  attacked them,  slightly  wounding  one  European  sailor.  The  men  went  off to  the  ship,  but  sent  back  a  boat  to  recover  the  buckets  and  clothes which  had  been  abandoned.  An  Andamanese  swam  off  to  the  boat with  the  clothes.  The  buckets  had  been  broken  up  for  the  sake  of their  iron  hoops.
This  showed  a  change  in  their  demeanour  from  utter  hostility  to a  mixture  of  timid  hostility  and  would-be  friendliness.
On  the  17th  December,  1880,  some  convicts  who  were  cuttin<* bamboos  in  the  jungle  west  of  Viper  were  fired  on  from  an  ambus" cade,  and  one  man  was  slightly  wounded  by  an  arrow.  The  savages were  not  seen,  so  the  guard  did  not  return  the  fire
On  the  31st  December,    I860,   the    Gangsman   on    Viper,  seein- ome  Andamanese  on  the  opposite  shore,  went  over  to  them  and  save ihem  some  plantains.     On  the  next  day  he  went  to  meet  them  again the  same  place,  on  their  calling  out  to  him,   and   gave   them   some before   leaving  they   fired   a  shower  of  arrows,  woundin* boatman  who  died  of  lock-jaw  as  a  result  of  the  wound    The  Gano-s° man   thought   the  reason   for  the  action  was  because  the  European apothecary  had  come  down  to   look  from   the   opposite   shore      (The Andamanese  are  very  easily  alarmed,   and   this    may   have   been   the •eason,   but   it   all  accords  only   too  well  with  what  we  know  of  their ucherouB  nature,  and  resembles  similar  actions  I  have   seen   at   the .Little  Andaman.)
On  the  3rd  and  4th  January,  1881,  three  men  and  two  boys  landed on  Viper.     They    wandered  about   and   were   allowed  to  take  all  the plantains  they  wanted.     Captain  Haughton  found  them,    on   the  4th with  a  full  load  of  plantains,  trying  to  get  into  a   rotten   and  broken -hey  baled  it  out  two  or   three  times  with   a   nautilus   shell and   at  last  set  off,  but  had  to  get  into  the  water  and  swim  behind  the' canoe  pushing  it  along.     They  showed  no  fear  at    being   closely   ex- umed  by  Captain   Haughton   and  his  European  Guard,  but  laughed
talked  incessantly,   and  were   quite   ready  to  dance  if  any lapped  their  hands  by  way  of  music.    They  had  bows  and  arrows  with them  which  they  did  not  attempt  to  use.
802
A  HISTORY  OF  OUH  RELATIONS
From  the  above  it  would  appear  as  if  the  Andamanese  bad  become more  really  friendly,  but  I  have  ascertained  from  tbem  that  such  was not  the  case.  Their  feelings  towards  us  at  this  time  were,  that  we were  too  strong  for  them  to  fight  and  overcome,  so  in  order  to  obtain the  fruit  and  metal  they  wanted,  they  cunningly  put  on  a  show  of friendliness  which  they  were  far  from  feeling.
Captain  Haughton  seems  to  have  understood  this,  as  be  ordered that,  when  the  Andamanese  came  armed,  they  were  to  be  ordered away,  and  were  only  to  be  allowed  on  the  island  when  unarmed.  He says  : —
"  With  all  their  rudeness,  the  Andamanese  well  understand  that it  is  manners  to  leave  their  arms  on  the  opposite  shore  when  they come  to  Viper  Island.  They  are  not  to  be  allowed  to  help  them- selves or  plunder,  and  only  a,  moderate  amount  is  to  be  given  to them.  On  the  9th  eight  Andamanese  came  over  in  a  canoe  again to  Viper  Island.  Four  came  up  and  four  remained  in  the  canoe. The  former  were  fed  as  usual  and  dismissed  with  a  full  stock  of plantains  to  each.
"  They  took  what  they  had  received  down  to  the  canoe,  and  re- turned for  more.  On  being  refused,  they  rushed  into  the  Convict  Line and  began  to  plunder.  The  Sebundy  Guard  was  called,  and  when they  came  in  sight,  the  Gangsman  caused  the  aborigines  to  be  seized by  the  convicts.  Their  bows  and  arrows,  with  which  they  had  threat- ened people,  were  taken  from  them,  and  after  a  short  time  they  were released  and  suffered  to  depart.  The  Gangsman  reports  that,  as  they left,  another  canoe  full  of  aborigines  came,  who,  however,  returned with  their  fellows.  The  Gangsman  begged  that  he  might  be  allowed to  keep  them  off  in  future,  as  he  apprehended  mischief.
"  He  was  again  referred  to  his  standing  orders,  viz.,  to  prevent any  from  landing  till  they  had  deposited  their  arms  on  the  other shore,  to  treat  them  kindly,  feed  them  moderately,  and  dismiss  them. He  was  directed  to  prevent  them  from  landing  armed,  and  to  seize any  who,  though  unarmed,  would  persist  in  plundering."
On  the   10th   January,   1861,  a  large  number  of  Andamanese
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  303
came  down  on  the  western  shore  facing  Viper  and  eight  came  over  to the  island  in  a  canoe.  In  spite  of  the  presence  of  the  Madras  Guard and  the  exhibition  of  muskets,  they  landed  and  cut  a  large  quantity of  plantains  without  permission,  filling  their  boat  so  full,  that,  to take  the  plantains  away,  they  had  to  leave  three  of  their  number behind.  The  Gangsman  had  these  three  seized,  and  in  the  scuffle  a convict  was  wounded  with  a  knife  made  from  hoop  iron,  which  was carried  by  one  of  the  savages  suspended  from  his  neck.  A  larger number  of  Andamanese  then  appeared  to  be  returning  in  the  canoe, so  the  guard  fired  over  them,  and  both  the  people  in  the  boat  and those  on  the  opposite  shore  fled.
One  of  the  prisoners  was  recognised  as  having  always  besn  a leader  of  attacking  parties,  and  was  the  man  who  unprovokedly  fired and  wounded  a  boatman  (who  subsequently  died),  on  the  31st December,  1859.  The  sailors  christened  him  "  Punch  Blair."
The  Andamanese  did  not  make  their  appearance  on  Viper  again for  some  time,  but  on  the  14th  January  eight  Andamanese  came  upon a  gang  of  convicts  who  were  clearing  a  path  from  Atalanta  Point to  Navy  Bay,  and,  without  much  resistance  on  their  part,  carried o&  the  tools  with  which  they  were  working,  They  also  took  the tickets  bearing  the  convicts'  numbers,  the  pieces  of  string,  etc.,  about their  persons,  and  the  Brahminical  cords  of  those  who  wore  them. Previous  to  this  occurrence,  the  Andamanese  had  not  been  known  to cross  the  line  on  which  the  convicts  were  working  for  15  months. A  guard  of  twenty  Sebundies  was  sent  with  the  party  the  next  day, when  this  party  was  again  attacked.  The  Sebundies  fired  a  few harmless  shots,  and  the  Gangsman  seized  and  bound  three  of  the Andamanese,  taking  their  arms  from  them.  One  Sebundy  was wounded  with  an  arrow,  and  another  had  a  bad  bite  in  the  arm.  Two Andamanese  had  their  ribs  broken,  and  two  had  slight  bayonet wounds,  all  of  which  were  inflicted  by  the  Sebundies  after  their  cap- ture, a  fact  of  which  Captain  Haughton  took  serious  notice.
One  of  the  prisoners  had  a  convict's  ticket  on  the  neck.  This with  an  axe,  and  a  Brahminical  cord,  were  from  the  plunder  of  the previous  day.
304  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
On  the  16th  January  "  Punch,"  who  had  been  closely  guarded  by the  Naval  Brigade,  managed  to  escape.  Having  a  boyish  appear- ance, though  no  boy,  he  was  only  secured  with  a  cord  which  he  hit through  during  the  night,  and  bolted.  Though  the  entire  Brigade was  turned  out  to  search  for  him,  he  could  not  he  found  owing  to  the darkness.
On  the  18th  January  a  Punjabi  male  convict  with  his  convict wife  escaped  from  Viper.  On  the  21th  a  canoe  was  seen  with  a single  Andamanese  in  it  who  had  a  white  garment  oc.  He  was  fired on.  The  Andamanese  (supposed  to  be  "Punch")  abandoned  the canoe,  and  on  examination  it  was  found  to  contain  a  tin  of  ghee,  most probably  the  property  of  the  convicts  who  escaped  on  the  18th.
On  the  18th,  also,  a  large  canoe  with  eight  or  ten  Andamanese  in it,  came  round  North  Point,  and  on  looking  through  a  glass  Captain Haughton  saw  that  there  was  also  a  large  party  of  Andamanese coming  along  the  shore  armed,  and  shooting  fish,  who  kept  parallel with  the  canoe.  One  of  the  shore  party  had  a  white  cloth  round  his head  and  waist,  and  two  were  painted  with  red  from  head  to  foot. All  of  them  were  naked.  Mr.  Brown  of  the  Naval  Brigade  was  sent in  a  boat  to  observe  the  movements  of  the  savages,  and  as  he  ap- proached the  party,  some,  including  the  white  clothed  Andamanese, made  off  into  the  jungle.  A  number,  however,  swam  off  boldly  to the  boat,  and  one  of  them  was  wearing  a  red  cloth.  Mr.  Brown  dis- trusted them  from  what  he  noticed  of  their  actions,  and  fired  a  shot over  them,  whereupon  they  fled.  The  red  cloth,  which  was  abandoned in  their  flight,  was  identified  as  the  upper  clothing  of  the  female c  onvict  who  ran  away  on  the  18th.
On  the  29th  the  party  of  five  Andamanese  prisoners  (the  two who  were  captured  with  «  Punch  "  on  the  10th,  and  the  three  who were  seized  on  the  15th)  struggled  violently  but  ineffectually  to escape  while  out  for  an  airing.
Captain  Haughton  writes:—
"  The  course  to  adopt  with  regard  to  the  Andamanese  has  been  a source  of  much  anxiety  to  me.  If  too  much  encouraged,  our  people are  liable  to  be  plundered,  killed,  or  wounded ;  on  the  other  hand
WITH  THE  ANOAMANESE.  305
without  some  encouragement  it  would  seem  as  if  we  must  forever remain  strangers,  and  at  war  with  them.
"  Considering  the  circumstances  under  which  the  five  captives have  come  into  our  hands,  viz.,  that  three  were  taken  in  an  aggres- sive attack,  and  that  the  other  two,  though  not  actually  at  the time  fighting  against  us,  had  formed  part  of  an  armed  plundering party,  and  that  one  of  them  had,  without  the  least  provocation, inflicted  a  wound  on  one  of  our  party,  from  the  elfects  of  which he  died,  I  have  thought  myself  warranted  in  detaining  them  with a  view  to  their  heing  made,  if  possible,  the  means  of  intercourse with  their  countrymen  hereafter.  But  I  find  it  impossible  to  retain them  here  without  an  amount  of  restraint  which  would  defeat  en- tirely our  object  in  keeping  them.  One  of  them  is  old  and  grey- headed, another  of  them  is  deformed  and  stupid.  These  two  I propose  to  keep  for  a  time  and  then  release.  The  other  throe  I  pro- pose shipping  to  the  Commissioner  of  Pegu,  to  be  retained  for  a  few months,  taught  a  little  English,  and  sent  back.  I  consider  the  cli- mate and  surroundings  of  the  Tenasserim  Coast  the  most  favourable for  them,  and  with  reference  to  this  fact,  and  the  fate  of  the  man captured  by  the  Andaman  Committee,  abstain  from  sending  them  to Calcutta.
"  They  will  be  embarked  on  the  Tubalcain  bound  for  Rangoon, and  I  have  requested  the  officer  commanding  the  Naval  Brigade  to send  with  them  one  of  the  men  who  has  been  specially  in  charge  of them,  and  he  will  remain  with  them  until  his  services  are  dispensed with  by  Colonel  Phayre.
"  Apart  from  a  natural  effort  to  regain  their  liberty,  they  have shown  themselves  quiet  and  tractable.  They  appear  to  be  fond  of their  keepers,  care  for  children  and  young  animals,  and  are  kind  to each  other."
Captain  Haughton's  conduct  in  this  matter  met  with  the  entire approval  of  the  Government  of  India,  who  issued  instructions  regard- ing the  Andamanese  fco  Colonel  Phayre,  and  allowed  the  necessary expenses  for  their  keep.
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
Captain  Haughton's  arrangement  was  most  judicious,  and,  as after  experience  with  the  Onge"s  of  the  Little  Andaman  has  taught, he  took  the  only  step  which  is  of  any  use  in  taming  the  Andamanese  ; i.e.,  he  sent  them  away  from  their  own  country  for  a  considerable period  to  a  land  where  they  saw  something  of  civilisation,  realised somewhat  the  extent  and  greatness  of  our  power  and  their  own  insig- nificance and  weakness,  and,  though  well  and  kindly  treated,  were kept  under  a  certain  amount  of  discipline.
I  have  discussed  the  whole  affair  with  Andamanese  who  remem- ber the  circumstances,  and  they  state  that  when  those  who  had  been taken  to  Moulmein  returned  from  there  and  related  all  that  they had  seen,  the  others  were  so  impressed  by  what  they  heard,  that  they at  last  realised  that  they  could  not  resist  us,  that  we  did  not  wish  to injure  them,  but  were  willing  to  be  friendly  and  kind,  and  they  there- fore began  from  that  time  to  cultivate  real  friendly  relations.  They admit  that  all  that  had  gone  before  was  mere  cunning  and  treachery adopted  with  a  view  to  throw  us  off  our  guard  and  thus  enable  them to  plunder  with  impunity.
They  state  that  the  real  names  of  the  Andamanese  captured
were  :  —
Tuesday  Blair.     Ira  J6bo.
Crusoe.     Bia  Kurcho.
Jumbo  (who  died  in  Moulmein).    Bira  Buj,
Friday.    Tural  1)6.
In  February,  1861,  with  a  view  to  meet  any  attack  on  the  Settle- ment by  the  aborigines,  a  path,  fifty  feet  wide,  was  cleared  from Atalanta  Settlement  to  Navy  Bay,  the  heaviest  timber  being  left standing.
[This  was  utterly  useless  for  the  purpose,  as  the  Andamanese would  cross  it,  certainly  at  night,  and  generally  in  the  day  time, without  being  observed  (as  it  was  not,  and  could  not  be,  guarded throughout  its  entire  length),  and  would  hide  in  the  jungle  on  the Settlement  side.]
The  following  correspondence  is  interesting  as  showing  that,  even in  1861,  some  few  observers  had  an  idea  regarding  the  origin  and  true
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  307
ethnological  position  of  the  Aadamanese,  though  this  was  not  generally accepted,  even  in  the  scientific  world,  till  comparatively  lately.
Lieutenant-Colonel  A.  Fytche,  Commissioner  of  the  Tenasserim and  Martahan  Provinces,  in  writing  to  the  Government  of  India  in the  Foreign  Department  on  the  28th  May,  1861,  forwards  a  letter from  Major  R.  S.  Tickell,  Deputy  Commissioner  of  Moulmein,  in whose  cbarge  the  three  Andamanese  prisoners  had  been  given.  Major Tickell  states  that  he  has  received  on  the  9th  May  the  three  Anda- manese, at  the  request  of  the  Commissioner  of  Pegu,  with  a  view  to their  education  and  civilisation ;  and  had  engaged  a  Burrnan  named Moung  Shway  Hman,  who  spoke  English,  and  with  whom  the  Anda- manese were  acquainted  in  their  own  country,  to  take  charge  of them,  feed,  clothe,  lodge,  and  teach  them  English,  at  a  cost  of  Rs.  30 for  each  man  per  mensem.  He  asks  for  a  grant  of  Rs.  100  per  men- sem from  the  Government  on  behalf  of  these  Andamanese,  and remarks  that  they  are  in  a  desponding  state  of  mind  owing  to  their captivity,  and  that  one  of  them  is  in  a  sickly  condition.
Colonel  Fytche  asked  that  this  sum  might  be  sanctioned,  pointing out  that  it  would  not  be  required  for  long,  and  in  reply  the  Govern- m  ent  of  India  sanctioned  the  grant  accordingly. Colonel  Fytche  in  his  letter  goes  on  to  say  : — "  Mr.  Blythe  of  the  Asiatic  Society,  who  is  now  staying  with  me at  Moulmein,  and  has,  with  myself,  made  a  special  study   of  these men,  considers  that  their  reputed  similarity  to  the  true  African  Negro has  been   greatly   exaggerated.     He  remarks  that  their  forehead  is well  formed  and  not  retreating,  neither  are  their  lips   coarse  and projecting,  and  their  nostrils  are  by  no  means  broad  ;  their  ear  is  small and  well  formed.    The  hair  is  unlike  the  so-called  woolly  hair  of  the Negro,  and  grows  conspicuously  in  separate  detached  tufts.     They have  scarcely  any  trace  of  whiskers,  beard,  or  moustache,  and  have been  long  enough  in  captivity  for  the  growth  of  such  were  it  existent. The  hair  of  the  head,  also,  shows  no  disposition  to  elongate,  but  con- tinues very   short  and  crisp.    The  complexion  is  not  a  deep  black, but  rather  of  a  sooty  hue ;  the  hands  and  feet  are  small,  the  latter  not showing  the  projecting  heel  of  the  true  Negro.
2s  2
308  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
"3.  The  Andamanese  appear  to  be  one  of  many  remnants  still  ex- tant of  a  race  that  was  formerly  very  extensively  diffused  over  South- Eastern  Asia  and  its  Archipelago,  which  for  the  most  part  has been  extirpated  by  races  more  advanced  towards  civilisation,  being now  driven  to  remote  islands  or  mountain  fastnesses,  such  as  the Andamans,  the  interior  of  the  Great  Nicobar  (where  they  are  reported to  be  constantly  at  warfare  with  the  people  of  the  coast),  and within  the  present  century  for  certain  (vide  Crawfurd*,  and  probably even  now,  there  are  one  or  more  tribes  of  them  in  the  mountains  of the  interior  of  the  Malayan  Peninsula,  Sumatra,  Borneo,  and  espe- cially the  Phillipine  Islands,  where  the  island  of  Negros  derives  this its  Spanish  name,  from  its  being  inhabited  by  a  blackish  race,  vari- ously known  as  the  Negrito,  Negrillo,  or  true  Papuan.  The  race has  its  head-quarters  in  the  great  Island  of  Papua,  or  New  Guinea, Avhere  some  tribes  are  found  attaining  to  six  feet  in  stature,  whilst others  are  so  diminutive  as  the  Andamanese.
"  4.  Upon  the  island  continent  of  Australia,  the  true  Papuan  type has  never  been  detected,  but  it  formerly  constituted  the  people  of Tasmania,  so  numerous  at  the  time  of  Captain  Cook's  visit,  but  which race  is  now  all  but  extinct,  three  or  four  individuals  only  surviving. The  history  of  the  capture  of  the  last  remnant  of  the  race  inhabiting Tasmania  is  well  known,  and  their  removal  to  an  island  in  Bass's Straits,  where  the  Government  provided  them  with  blankets  and  a certain  amount  of  food,  but  it  is  remarkable  that  they  died  off  fast and  chiefly  from  pulmonary  consumption.  The  same  remark  has been  made  also  of  the  New  Zealander,  belonging  to  a  very  different race  of  human  kind,  since  the  introduction  of  blankets  and  other European  clothing  amongst  them,  they  having  also  been  subject  to pulmonary  diseases  which  seem  to  have  been  unknown  before.
"  5.  Now  it  is  remarkable  that,  of  the  three  Andamanese  at  present in  Moulmein,  one  is  already  suffering  from  a  pulmonary  affection,  and it  is  desirable  that  he  at  laast  should  be  returned  to  Port  Blair  by  the first  opportunity.  The  others  also  appear  to  be  pining  from  this cause,  or  from  home  sickness,  and  they  are  not  likeK  to  learn  much more  than  they  have  already  learnt,  should  tbn'i  stay  be  longer
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
protracted.  Besides,  it  may  not  be  desirable  to  overstrain  their  facul- ties. They  are  quite  able  to  appreciate  tbe  kindness  with  which they  have  been  treated,  and  it  is  well  that  they  should  communicate this  to  their  fellow  savages.  It  may  be  finally  added  that  they  have teen  uniformly  tractable  and  good  humoured,  and  have  manifested  a marked  partiality  for  children.  It  is  to  be  regretted  th#t  scarcely  a word  has  been  gathered  of  their  language,  the  sounds  of  which  are  by no  means  confused  or  inarticulate.  The  reason  is  that  they  persist in  imitating  every  sound  that  is  addressed  to  them,  and  it  is  only when  they  try  to  make  themselves  understood,  or  are  speaking  one to  another,  that  an  idea  of  their  vocal  enunciation  can  be  obtained. Although  in  the  prime  of  life,  they  are  in  fact  too  old  to  be  taught much.  But,  should  any  accident  happen  to  throw  children  of  the race  under  the  care  of  Captain  Haughton,  there  might  then  be  a better  opportunity  of  acquiring  means  of  linguistic  communica- tion."
In  the  above  Colonel  Fytche  falls  into  the  common  error  of imagining  that  the  hair  of  the  Andamanese  grows  from  the  roots  in tufts.  In  reality,  the  hair  is  evenly  distributed  over  the  scalp,  but  is of  so  curly  a  nature  that  when  a  few  adjacent  hairs  have  attained  to the  length  of  about  half  an  inch,  they  twist  together  and  form  a little  spiral  tuft.  Their  hair  will  also  grow  very  long,  but  some  years is  required  for  the  effect  to  become  fully  apparent.
Colonel  Fytche  is  entirely  iu  error  in  considering  the  Papuans  of New  Guinea  to  be  the  parent  race  of  the  Negrito  stock,  the  latter being  by  far  the  older,  and  Papuans  not  being  true  Negritos.  It  is curious  that  he  should  know  so  much  of  the  habits  of  the  Shorn  Pen tribe  in  the  interior  of  the  Great  Nicobar,  who  are,  as  he  correctly observes,  at  war  with  the  coast  tribe,  but  whose  existence  was  onlv definitely  known  to  the  officials  of  Port  Blair  after  1878.  They  are not,  as  he  and  others  since  have  imagined,  Negritos,  but  are  of Malayo-Mongoloid  descent  like  the  other  Nicobarese.  It  is  doubtful whether  there  are  any  true  Negritos  in  Sumatra  or  Borneo,  and  those in  the  mountains  of  the  Malay  Peninsula  (the  Semangs)  are  not pure.  The  Negritos  of  the  Phillipines,  and  the  now  extinct  Tasmanians,
sio
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
seem  to  have  been,  besides  the  Andamanese,  the  only  pure  Negrito races  in  modern  times.
On  the  23rd  January,  1861,  three  Malay  prows  were  observed about  26  miles  to  the  north-west  of  Port  Blair,  proceeding  north- ward through  the  Archipelago  Islands.  Captain  Haughton  at  once sent  the  gun-boat  Clyde  after  them,  and  they  were  brought  in  to him  the  next  morning.
The  headman  of  one  of  them  was  the  same  who  had  visited  the Andamans  in  April,  1860.  Their  clearance  was  for  the  Nicobar  Islands, but  they  had  a  letter  to  Captain  Haughton  from  the  Deputy  Commis- sioner of  Mergui,  and  a  permission  to  call  at  the  Andamans  in  order that  they  might  ask  to  be  allowed  to  collect  trepang  and  edible birds'  nests  there.  It  was  clear  that  they  had  no  intention  of  asking this  permission,  so  Captain  Haughton  detained  them  for  a  fortnight  as a  punishment  and  then  sent  them  to  the  Nicobars.  They,  however, went  down  to  MacPherson's  Straits  and  hid  there,  where  the  Clyde found  them  on  the  20th  February  and  brought  them  in  again  to Port  Blair.  Captain  Haughton  then  had  their  sails  removed  and detained  them  till  the  end  of  the  monsoon.  (We  have  since  learnt that  the  Malays  came  freely  to  the  Andamans  at  this  time,  and  until very  much  later,  indeed,  it  is  doubtful  whether  we  saw  the  last  of them  before  1884.)
As  there  was  nothing  further  to  be  gained  by  keeping  the  two remaining  Andamanese  prisoners,  who  had  not  been  sent  to  Moul- mein,  in  custody,  they  were  released  on  the  loth  February,  1861,  on the  spot  where  they  were  caught.  They  were  given  as  many  of  the usual  presents  as  they  could  carry,  appeared  reluctant  to  leave  their keeper,  kissing  his  hands  and  trying  to  induce  him  to  accompany them.  (They  were  really  blowing  on  his  hands,  "  more  Andamanico  " in  token  of  farewell.)
Captain  Haughton  thought  that  the  effect  of  the  capture  and  kind treatment  of  these  men  had  been  good,  as  there  had  been  no  attacks since,  and  a  few  days  after  their  release,  one  of  our  boats,  a  short  way down  the  coast,  met  a  party  of  Andamanese  with  the  hump-backed
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
man  called  by  the  sailors  "  Tuesday  Blair."  The  Andamanese  laid aside  their  bows  and  arrows  and  came  down  to  the  boat,  two  or  three remaining  with  the  women  and  arms  about  100  paces  off.  They asked  for  plantains,  which  they  called  Kangray  or  Hangray  (Engara- da).  A  sailor,  wanting  a  bow,  tried  to  bargain  for  it,  but  though  it was  brought  for  him  to  look  at,  he  did  not  offer  enough  and  it  was taken  back.  The  Andamanese  were  then  given  a  fishing  line  and some  hooks,  and  parted  with  on  friendly  terms.
Captain  Haughton  saw  them  in  the  distance  at  North  Corbyn's Cove  a  few  days  later,  and  left  plantains  for  them  on  the  beach  which they  took  after  he  had  gone.  He  states  that  "  judging  from  the demeanour  of  the  captives  when  not  trying  to  escape,  the  Andamanese appear  to  he  kind  to  one  another,  gentle,  and  tractable.  A  Sebundy broke  one  of  "Tuesday's"  ribs,  after  capturing  him,  and  his  com- panion scarified  him  with  broken  glass  and  nursed  him.  They  would eat  from  morning  to  night,  preferring  pig's  flesh,  roasted  unripe plantains,  and  yams.  Ripe  plantains,  biscuits,  and  rice  they  do  not care  for.
"  Whatever  is  given  to  them  they  divide  very  honestly,  though the  owaer  helps  himself  first.  The  food  over  at  night  is  carefully packed  to  be  eaten  in  the  morning.
"  Very  little  of  their  language  had  been  learnt,  but  a  list  of  words was  made  by  Lieutenant  Hellard.  As  regards  their  religion,  Symes says  that  they  have  none  :  Dudhndth  also  says  that  they  have  not. Thr  keepers  say  that  daily  when  by  themselves,  but  at  no  regular hour,  they  go  through  a  kind  of  worship.  They  sit,  and  one  repeat some  words  to  which  the  rest  respond,  touching  in  turn  various  parts of  their  bodies.  This  would  last  for  half  an  hour,  and  they  left  off when  observed."  (It  is  difficult  to  understand  what  actually  occur- red. The  Andamanese  were  probably  telling  tales  with  their  usual gestures,  or  singing. — M .  V.  P.)
On  the  27th  March,  1861,  some  Andamanese  visited  Viper  Island and  begged  for  plantains,  coming  unarmed  and  peaceably.  They  did not  attempt  to  take  any  by  force.
On  the  llth  May,  250  Andamanese  men  and  boys  suddenly  came
312  A  HI>TORY  OF  OUR  REL  \TIOVS
to  Aberdeen.  The  Gangsman  drew  up  the  men  under  arms  and  met them  outside  the  enclosure.  He  gave  them  plantains,  and  five buckets  of  water  which  they  drank.  Seeing  that  something  unusual •nas  happening,  Captain  Haughton  proceeded  to  the  spot,  and  the Andamanese  seeing  his  boat  approach,  decamped.  He  thought  that they  came  to  plunder,  hut  were  frightened  by  the  guard.  It  appears that  they  had  met  some  convicts  cutting  bamboos,  and  had  takeu from  them  17  axes,  and  bad  wounded  a  buffalo.
On  the  29th  May  a  smaller  party  appeared  on  the  same  place, but  beyond  stripping  some  Burmese  whom  they  met  in  the  jungle, they  did  no  harm.  On  the  12th  June  a  party  of  Burmese  who  had gone  some  miles  up  a  creek  to  get  bamboos  were  surprised  by  the Andamanese  who  fired  at  them,  and  tried  to  capture  their  raffc  of bamboos.  The  Burmese  evaded  the  arrows,  and  the  overseer  fired a  charge  of  bird  shot  which  put  the  enemy  to  flight  without  loss  of life  on  either  side.
On  the  17th  and  21st  June  some  Andamanese  came  to  Viper and  begged  for  plantains  which  they  were  given.  The  Gangsman tried  to  induce  them  to  bring  in  bamboos  in  exchange,  but  without success.
On  the  3rd  July,  1861,  Captain  Haughton  heard  that  one  of  the Andamanose  captives  sent  to  Burmah  had  died  there.  He  therefore asked  that  the  remaining  two  might  be  sent  back  to  the  Andamans, as  they  had  already  been  nine  months  in  custody.  His  request  was complied  with.
On  the  7th  October,  1861,  an  armed  force  of  police  was  provider! to  protect  the  convicts  from  the  Andamanese ;  the  Sebundy  Corps, which  had  not  been  a  success,  being  disbanded.
During  July  some  Andamanese  came  to  Viper  and  stole  some plantains,  and  on  the  25th  of  that  month  some  others  met  a  party of  convicts  at  work  in  the  jungle  and  stole  their  tools.  The  convicts resisted,  so  the  Andamanese  fired  on  them  and  wounded  one  man. The  convict  guard  then  fired  and  the  Andamanese  ran  off.  The same  evening  some  more  of  the  savages  landed  in  two  canoes  on Viper  after  dark,  and  stole  a  quantity  of  plantains,  but  on  a  musket
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
being   fired,   they   bolted.     This  landing  to  be  given  plantains  in  the day,  and  the  attempts  to  steal  them  at  night,  went  on  for  some  time.
On  the  17th  August  four  Andamanese  tried  to  steal  some  plan- tains, and  being  prevented  from  doing  so  tried  to  shoot  the  sentry.
On  the  20th  August  three  men  and  one  woman  came  to  Viper,  but being  armed  were  warned  off.  The  men  threatened  the  guard  with their  bows,  but  the  woman  pushed  the  weapons  on  one  side  and  began to  bog.  Presents  were  then  given  to  them.  It  was  noticed  that  the woman  wore  the  apron  of  leaves  (Obunga-fci).
On  the  22nd  August  another  party  of  12  Andamanese  carried off  a  wild  pig  which  a  Burmese  was  bringing  in  to  Atalanta  Point, but  some  other  convicts  being  near  it  was  rescued.  The  Anda- manese threatened  them,  but  did  not  shoot.
On  the  2uth  August  four  men  landed  on  Viper  and  began  to plunder.  They  shot  at  the  sentry,  were  fired  upon,  and  then  ran off.
On  the  27th  they  landed  during  the  night  and  plundered  in safety.
On  the  29th  they  again  landed  during  the  day  and  were  given presents  by  the  Deputy  Superintendent,  Dr.  Hayes.
On  the  30th  seven  landed  again,  each  bringing  two  bamboos, and  were  rewarded  for  doing  so.  They  evidently  knew  what  was required  from  them.
On  the  31st  some  Andamanese  came  to  Aberdeen,  but  did  no harm.
On  the  5th  September,  at  2  P.M.,  a  party  landed  on  Viper  and began  to  plunder.  A  random  volley  was  fired,  and  they  swam  off leaving  their  boat.
On  the  12th  some  of  them  met  some  convicts  and  stole  some tools.
On  the  6th  October  a  party  landed  on  Viper  Island  at  11  P.M., and  were  accidentally  met  by  the  police  rounds.  A  fight  ensued, in  which  one  of  the  police  and  one  Audamane-se  were  wounded,  and the  latter  fled  leaving  their  bows,  arrows,  knives,  and  30  bunches of  plantains.
li
314  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
On  the  8th  October  a  party  came  at  noon  to  Viper  Island,  but were  warned  off.  They  fired,  and  the  guard  turned  out  and  drove them  oif,  killing  one  Andamanese  and  capturing  their  boat.
On  the  10th,  two  boatloads  of  them  came  at  11  P.M.,  and  plun- dered. The  police  stumbled  upon  them,  a  fight  ensued,  and  one Andamanese  was  wounded.  The  others  put  him  in  a  boat  and  made off,  swimming  and  paddling,  leaving  one  boat  and  sundry  weapons.
They  did  not  appear  again  till  the  17th  of  November,  when  they met  a  fishing  boat  in  a  creek,  and  plundered  it,  taking  everything, even  the  convicts'  ankle  rings.
The  Andamanese  in  these  quarrels  were  always  the  aggressors, and  it  is  evident  that  they  had  no  feeling  of  goodwill  towards  us.
On  the  12th  September  the  two  surviving  Andamanese  were received  from  Moulmein,  and  were  landed  on  the  same  evening, loaded  with  presents,  and  released.
On  the  27th  of  October  Captain  Haughton  saw  a  native  in  a small  bay  to  the  south  of  the  harbour  who  followed  the  boat  along  the shore.  Some  plantains  were  held  up  when  he  dropped  his  bow  and arrows  and  ran  on  ahead  pointing  out  the  best  landing  place.  He was  "  Tuesday  "  who  had  been  released  on  the  15th  of  the  preceding February.  He  devoured  the  plantains,  which,  Captain  Haughton says,  were  so  unripe  that  a  pig  would  not  have  eaten  them,  and  when he  asked  for  fire,  the  Andamanese  went  away,  presumably  to  bring some,  but  was  so  long  absent  that  the  party  had  shoved  off  when  he returned  with  it.  They  could  see  his  companions,  who  were  afraid  to venture  out  from  the  cover  of  the  jungle.
The  following  extracts  from  the  Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of Bengal,  Vol.  XXX,  1861,  pp.  261—267,  are  here  given  :—
NOTES  ON  THE  ANDAMANESH  CAPTUREB  AT  PORT
BLAIR.
Thursday,  10th  January,  1861.— Three  of  the  aborigines  captured at  Viper  Island.  "Went  up  in  the  launch  and  found  them  in  the stocks,  and  apparently  quite  indifferent,  until  taken  to  the  boat,
WITH  THE  ANDAMANE8E.
handcuffed  with  their  hands  behind  their  backs.  In  beating  down, they  seemed  to  expect  to  be  landed  whenever  we  neared  the  shore  : they  instantly  asked  for  "  punno  "  (water),  and  all  three  at  the  same moment  managed  to  bring  their  hands  in  front.  On  landing  at  Ross Island  they  were  very  sullen,  but  eating  plantains  freely  or  anything else  that  was  given  them.  During  the  night  one  remained  awake,  and two  out  of  the  three  managed  to  get  off  their  handcuffs,  their  wrists being  remarkably  small.  A  man  was  appointed  to  look  after  each, and  they  named  them  Punch,  Friday,  and  Crusoe,  with  the  surname of  Blair.  They  did  not  appear  the  least  astonished  at  anything  they saw,  nor  do  they  like  the  men  over  them  to  leave  them.
llth. — Fish  being  brought  for  them,  Crusoe  turned  cook,  opening and  cleaning  them  with  his  teeth,  and,  when  done,  divided  it  all equally  ;  this  finished,  he  roasted  green  plantains,  and  they  all  ate enormously.  During  the  night,  the  one  on  watch,  Punch,  fancied the  sentry  was  asleep,  and  awoke  the  others  to  be  ready  for  a  run  ;  he then  crept  to  the  bottom  of  the  bed,  but  a  box  on  the  ear  soon convinced  him  that  if  Jack  did  sleep,  it  was  with  his  weather-eye lifting.  When  taken,  they  were  quite  in  a  state  of  nature,  but  to-day they  were  dressed  and  taken  up  to  the  Superintendent's  house. Here  they  appeared  some wl. at  surprised,  particularly  at  a  large  mirror, at  which  they  grinned,  but  they  were  very  much  taken  up  with  little Harry  Haughton,  and  so  inquisitive  did  they  become,  that  Mr.  Punch wished  to  lift  his  clothes  to  see  whether  he  was  a  boy  or  a  girl ;  he also  wished  to  take  ornaments  from  the  neck  of  one  of  the  native women.  They  now  are  not  the  least  afraid,  although  at  times  very sullen.
12th. — Had  all  three  at  the  officers'  quarters,  with  the  view  of picking  up  some  of  their  language,  but  they  were  so  much  taken  up  with pictures  and  other  things  that  they  merely  repeated  every  word  we said.  Their  height  is :  Friday,  4  feet  10  inches ;  Punch,  5  feet 4  inches  ;  Crusoe,  5  feet  2|  inches.'
13th. — Being  Sunday,  all  three  were  nicely  dressed  in  white,  with straw  hats  with  "  I.  N.  Brigade"  on  the  ribbon,  which  was  a  vast improvement.  In  the  afternoon  they  went  for  a  walk  on  the  beach,
316  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
and  went  over  the  gun-boat,  walking  after  their  keepers  in  a  quiet orderly  manner.  Everything  like  nietal  they  admire  and  want,  and when  the  handcuffs  were  removed,  they  did  not  wish  them  to  be  taken away,  and  at  the  blacksmith's  shop  they  wanted  to  take  away  all  the bar  iron.  In  the  evening,  seeing  the  new  moon  for  the  first  time, they  called  out  "  Auckalareeo,"  and  commenced  dancing  and  insisting on  the  men  doing  so  with  them,  clapping  with  their  hands  to  keep time,  so  that  this  is  no  doubt  a  great  day  with  them.  (No. — M.  F.P.) 14th. — They  seem  to  improve  daily  and  their  health  is  good.  They all  went  to  see  the  men  at  work  at  their  different  trades,  but  seemed only  to  care  for  the  blacksmith  and  tinker.  Punch,  seeing  an  English woman,  wished  to  kiss  her  (they  do  not  kiss  much — M.  V.  P.),  and Friday  took  the  chain,  a  silver  one,  off  an  Ayah's  neck,  which  was  of course  returned.  Seeing  me  he  came  up,  and  taking  hold  of  my  beard, put  his  hand  inside  my  shirt  collar,  to  see  whether  I  had  a  chain  of any  kind.  He  also  made  motions  to  another  officer,  that  he  would cut  his  throat  for  his  gold  chain  and  ring  ;  they  are  apparently  fond of  all  animals,  and  have  constantly  a  cat  or  a  dog  in  their  arms. They  are  very  suspicious  of  our  food,  but  will  take  anything  uncooked, but  they  don't  appear  to  eat  undressed  meat  of  any  kind,  and  they also  share  all  they  get  equally  ;  at  one  meal  they  will  eat  a  bunch of  plantains  weighing  nine  seers,  or  eighteen  pounds,  besides  meat. When  the  natives  of  India  were  near  them,  they  mutter  at  them, but  it  is  impossible  to  catch  the  words,  but  it  appears  from  their manner  to  be  abuse.  They  were  asking  for  their  fish  to-day,  and having  none,  a  pigeon  was  given  to  each,  which  they  cleaned  and boiled,  but  they  were  very  much  puzzled  to  see  four  killed  at  one shot.  Crusoe,  seeing  a  spy-glass,  took  it  up,  and  brought  it  to  the ready,  taking  aim  at  the  same  time,  he  then  made  a  noise  with  his mouth,  and  threw  his  head  back,  as  if  he  was  killed.  The  working party  at  Aberdeen  were  attacked  to-day,  and  driven  in  with  the  loss of  all  their  tools,  and  a  party  of  men  (N.B.)  were  sent,  but  saw nothing  of  the  aborigines ;  although  they  recovered  someof  the axes,  etc.  The  officer  states  that  he  should  say  about  20  had  been there,  the  natives  report  50.  A  strong  guard  will  be  in  future
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
sent  to  protect  the  convicts.  The  savages  are  evidently  accustomed to  food  the  instant  they  awake,  and  if  anything  is  left,  they  roll  it  up in  a  piece  of  cloth,  and  mar  it  down,  in  the  same  way  they  hide  away bits  of  iron  of  any  kind ;  they  seem  quite  resigned,  and  do  not  appear to  care  for  their  own  free  land.
15th. — The  aborigines  again  attacked  and  wounded  the  convicts working  in  the  jungle,  also  one  of  the  Sehundy  guard,  but  three  were taken  prisoners,  and  brought  oyer ;  two  are  old  men,  and  the  other  a nice-looking  lad.  I  was  informed  thnt  one  of  them,  the  oldest,  and who  has  been  injured  in  the  back,  apparently  by  a  shot  some  time back,  knocked  over  eight  natives  before  he  was  taken  prisoner  :  some bows  and  arrows  were  taken  with  these  men  ;  they  are  nearly  the same  as  the  others,  and  all  about  the  same  height.  Their  teeth appear  to  he  all  worn  down  flat,  not  sharp  as  in  other  people's.  On their  being  taken  to  the  barracks,  their  friends  came  to  meet  them, but  they  are  not  of  the  same  party  apparently,  and  they  did  not  show any  sign  of  pleasure  at  seeing  them.  Signs  were  made  to  take  them to  the  wash-house,  and  here  they  were  scrubbed,  excepting  the  injured man,  who  was  carefully  placed  on  a  cot  until  the  arrival  of medical  aid,  when  he  was  fomented  on  the  back,  and  had  some medicine,  and  he  slept  for  some  time,  and  could  then  eat  a  good supper.  At  night  these  three  were  taken  to  another  part  of  the barracks,  when  they  all  became  frightened,  and  clung  to  the  men in  charge,  and  begged  them  not  to  let  them  go  ;  and,  to  make  them quite  easy,  they  were  shown  where  they  going,  and  they  went  to  bed quite  contentedly.  They  dance  and  sing  every  evening,  but  they require  to  be  constantly  watched,  as  they  want  everything  they  see, One  of  the  men  passed  during  the  day  with  some  fresh  pork,  and  they caught  hold  of  him,  and  insisted  on  having  some,  calling  out  Ehogo  I Rhogo!  (pig,  pig).  The  instant  food  is  given  to  them  they  eat,  and if  you  te'l  them  that  they  do  not  want  it,  they  draw  in  their  stomachs, as  though  they  wished  you  to  understand  they  were  empty.  The  men taken  to-day  are  very  much  thinner  than  the  others,  and  their  heads are  all  shaved ;  one  has  the  great  toe  of  his  right  foot  off,  and  he  says it  was  taken  off  by  a  large  clam.  He  is  named  "  Toeless  Blair."
318  A  HISTORY  OV  OUR  RELATIONS
Another  has  a  long  scar  extending  from  above  the  knee  down  to the  ankle,  and  is  named  "  Tuesday  Blair."  The  other  is  named "  Jumho."  Crusoe  was  most  anxious  to  have  them  dressed,  and without  being  told  they  took  off  all  the  wild  ornaments,  and  threw them  down.  One  man  had  a  large  quantity  of  rubbish  about  his neck  ;  also  a  convict's  ticket,  and  even  a  Brahmin's  thread,  and  two old  rusty  nails.
16th. — This  morning  they  were  in  sad  tribulation  because  they  had no  fish,  and  the  beef  and  vegetables  given  by  the  steward  did  not satisfy  them,  but  before  eleven  some  came  up,  and  they  were  per- fectly frantic,  dancing  and  caressing  the  man  who  brought  it  up. Mr.  Crusoe  turned  doctor,  he  got  the  sick  man  up,  washed  his  back with  cold  water,  and  punctured  it  all  over  with  a  sharp  piece  of glass  which  appeared  to  relieve  him  vastly,  and  he  then  washed  off the  blood,  and  turned  to  clean  and  cook  the  fish,  eating  all  the  small ones  first,  and  leaving  the  coarser  kind  for  the  evening  meal :  in  the evening  they  danced  to  the  fiddle,  and  appeared  in  high  glee.
17th. — About  half  past  three  Punch  made  his  escape,  having succeeded  in  the  night  to  get  his  handcuffs  off,  but  these  were  too precious  to  be  left  behind.  Every  search  was  made  immediately,  but the  jungle  gave  him  shelter,  until  he  no  doubt  swam  to  the  mainland, to  fetch  which  he  must  be  an  expert  swimmer,  as  it  was  blowing  hard and  a  good  sea  rolling  in.  Friday  had  his  irons  off  his  hands,  and was  evidently  ready  for  a  start,  but  the  first  noise  caused  an  alarm, and  to  his  no  small  annoyance  all  his  hopes  were  frustrated.  On  the principle  of  locking  the  stable  door,  the  whole  of  them  were  placed in  slight  leg  irons,  which  will  at  least  prevent  their  moving  far  : all  day  they  have  been  very  sullen,  and  when  out,  their  eyes  seem to  be  constantly  fixed  on  Atalanta  Point,  as  though  they  expected  aid from  that  quarter.
18th. — Tbis  morning,  when  raining,  and  they  wished  to  go  out,  they took  their  clotbes  off  first,  so  that  they  might  not  get  wet.  They still  keep  sullen,  and  are  evidently  ready  for  a  bolt,  provided  they  see a  favourable  opportunity  ;  and  with  no  place  of  security,  and  their well  known  cunning,  it  is  impossible  to  keep  them,  however  strongly
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
319
watched.  Shortly  before  sunset,  the  air  being  cool  and  damp,  I  found them  sitting  round  the  fire,  and  each  had  a  large  piece  of  it  holding it  between  his  legs.
19th. — No  fish  being  caught  to-day,  they  had  only  plantains,  and  in the  evening  Crusoe  went  up  to  H.  Smith  and  kissed  him,  at  the  same time  pointing  to  the  barracks,  and  making  signs  he  was  hungry,  for sometimes  they  went  to  the  men's  messes  of  an  evening,  but  since the  escape  it  has  not  been  allowed.
20th. — Irons  are  not  at  all  pleasant,  and  to  hear  them  growl  is not  bad  ;  they  are  very  anxious  to  have  them  taken  off,  and  towards dark  they  pretend  to  have  pains  in  all  their  limbs.  Crusoe  asked,  $o as  to  be  understood,  when  he  would  be  let  go.
21st. — To-day  they  beg  hard  to  have  the  irons  off,  and  promise  as well  as  they  can  not  to  run  away,  but  it  must  not  be  done.
22nd. — Not  at  all  pleased  at  having  to  clean  their  room  out,  the  beds they  are  almost  too  lazy  to  wash,  but  would  eat  all  day,  if  allowed.
VOCABULARY  ATTACHED.
English.
Anclamanese.
REMAKKS.
Bow      .         .
Borogelly
Not  understood.
Fly
Boomee
£utnila-(ia,.
Bow-string     .         .
Flyda   .
Not  understood.
Water,  give    .
Pano  do  walay
Pdni,  (Urdu)    d6todl>j-ke Water.    I  want  to  drink.
Yes        ...
Oh       ...
(3-o.
Flesh     .
Rogo    .
Rdgo-da,  means  "  A  sow  ".
Fowl     .         .
Deer     .
ZHa-da     means     "  mine  " (possibly  referring  to  the fowl).
Shell     .
Ortamboo
Not  understood.
To  cut   .
Chalock        .
Cfh6l-k6.
Knife    .          .          .
Coono  .
jKa«»o-da.
320
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
English.
Andamauese.
REMARKS.
To  drink
Meengohee    .
Not  understood.     Probably derived  from  Colebrooke's Vocabulary.
Canoe    .         .
Hobab  .
Not  understood.
Water    .
Panno
Obviously  Urdu.
Plantains        .         .
Chan  grab
£nff4ra-ta.
Take  off
Ne  giah
Not  understood.
To  paddle Tongs    .
Cheilla Chy      .
Not     understood.       Abuse was  probably  meant.
Edi-da.
Moon     .
Chuckalareoo
Chiloko-lero.     The      Moon in  the  first  quarter.
Whiskers
Sooka  ,
Not  understood.
Music    .
Dentregnah  .
Not  understood.
Eat
Lay
Z^-ke.
To  give  .
De  walay      .
Possibly  "  Do  welij-ke."   I wish  to  drink.
Yam
Cbatah
Chdti-(la,.
Fish      .
Dar  Jouh
Possibly     "  D'tir-joi."      I am  going  to  cook  it.
No  good
—  a  mackrey
Not  understood.    'A.  mek- re  "  be  has  eaten  it  "  may have  been  said.
Wood    .
Cbopah         .
Chdpa-tia.     "  Firewood.  '  '
Bed-quilt
Dootram
JD'dt-raw-ke*.        I      wrap myself  up  in  it.
A  Note  on  certain  Aborigines  of  tbe  Andaman  Islands,  by Lieutenant-Colonel  Albert  Fytche,  Commissioner  of  the  Tenasserim and  Martaban  Provinces  : —
A  chance  has  occurred  to  me  lately  of  observing  three  aborigines
WITH  THE  ANDAMANE3E.  321
of  the  Andamans,  who  were  captured  in  the  vicinity  of  Port  Blair, some  four  months  ago,  in  an  attempt,  together  with  others  of  their countrymen,  to  acquire  possession  of  the  working  implements  of  a party  of  convicts.  They  were,  however,  surrounded  by  the  convicts, who  happened  to  be  in  considerable  numbers  at  the  time,  and  as  many as  seven  of  them  were  taken  prisoners.  These  were  deprived  of  their arms,  and  detained  for  some  weeks  at  Port  Blair,  when  one  of  them managed  to  effect  his  escape,  and  three  others  were  released  from durance.  The  remaining  three  who  were  less  advanced  in  years  than the  rest  of  the  party,  it  was  deemed  advisable  to  send  off  by  a steamer  leaving  the  Settlement  for  Rangoon,  with  a  view  to  ascertain whether  some  knowledge  of  their  language  could  be  acquired,  and  at the  same  time  to  impart  to  them  some  idea  of  the  power  and resources  of  their  captors.
While  in  Rangoon,  they  were  lodged  for  security's  sake  within the  precincts  of  the  jail,  under  charge  of  an  English  sailor,  who  took them  out  daily  for  a  walk  about  the  town  and  suburbs.  Though regarded  with  great  curiosity  by  the  Burmese,  they  did  not  appear to  be  at  all  disconcerted  by  the  notice  they  occasioned.  No  progress was,  however,  made  in  acquiring  means  of  communication  with  them, and  it  was  thought  desirable  to  forward  them  to  Moulmein,  from which  place  they  might  the  more  readily  be  shipped  to  their  own country,  should  circumstances  require  it.
On  their  landing  at  Moulmein  from  the  steamer,  they  happened to  meet,  and  recognise  in  the  street,  an  intelligent  Bunnan  who  was formerly  in  the  service  of  Captain  Haughton,  the  present  Superintend- ent  of  Port  Blair,  a  man  who  had  moreover  a  passable  knowledge  of the  English  language,  and  who  willingly  undertook  the  charge  of them  upon  the  terms  offered  to  him.
On  the  voyage  from  Rangoon  to  Moulmein,  Mr.  Blyth  of  our Society  had  a  constant  opportunity  of  observing  them,  and  contrived to  ingratiate  himself  into  their  good  favour.  Short  as  had  been  their introduction  into  civilized  life,  they  had  already  acquired  a  fondness for  tobacco,  and  he  states  there  was  no  better  passport  to  their  good graces  than  an  offer  of  a  cheroot,  and  it  was  amusing  to  observe  how
2r
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
quickly  they  learned  the  pocket  in  which  any  one  kept  his  cheroots, for  they  would  point  to  the  pocket,  and  give  a  gesture  by  way  of  hint that  they  would  like  to  enjoy  one.  Being  thus  indulged,  they  would quite  politely  offer  to  take  a  light  from  the  cigar  of  any  one  who happened  to  he  smoking  in  their  vicinity,  and  in  return  would  offer a  light  from  their  cigar  when  it  was  needed.  They  were  in  high spirits  when  on  hoard  the  steamer,  evidently  supposing  that  the  vessel was  destined  for  their  own  country  ;  they  had  picked  up  the  name Port  Blair  and  could  always  most  readily  indicate  the  exact  direction of  their  own  islands,  pointing  to  the  position  of  the  sun  as  their  guide. This  they  intimated  by  signs  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  misunder- stand. They  were  accordingly  disappointed  when  brought  ashore  at Moulmein,  and  were  at  first  downhearted,  when  the  steamer  left without  taking  them,  but  apparently  recovered  their  self-possession  in the  course  of  a  few  days.  One,  however,  was  ailing  from  a  pulmonary
disorder,  from  which  he  is  still  suffering.
******
Since  the  foregoing  remarks  were  committed  to  paper,  our Andamanese  friends  conceived  the  idea  of  an  escape,  and  very  nearly carried  it  into  effect.  One  very  boisterous  and  rainy  night,  it  was discovered  at  2  A.M.  that  they  had  absconded,  and  at  dawn  their footprints  were  traced  to  a  saw-pit,  on  the  banks  of  the  Moulmein rirer,  near  their  late  place  of  abode,  where  it  appears  they  had collected  a  few  loose  planks,  with  which  they  had  formed  a  raft,  and boldly  launched  themselves  off.  A  single  large  yam  was  the  only provision  they  had  taken  with  them,  as  far  as  could  be  learned. Three  police  boats  were  sent  immediately  in  pursuit  of  the  fugitives, and  at  nightfall  intelligence  was  obtained  of  their  Laving  been  seen by  a  Talaing,  ou  an  islet  about  twelve  miles  below  Moulmein.  On the  same  night  they  must  have  again  pushed  forward  on  their  raft, which  was  soon  broken  up  on  their  arrival  in  rough  water,  whereupon they  swam  ashore,  landing  at  the  south-east  corner  of  the  island  of Beloo  Kyoung,  near  the  entrance  of  the  river.  They  were  there  seen by  some  villagers,  who,  suspecting  them  to  be  runaways,  took  them  to their  Kyee-dan-gyee,  or  village  elder,  by  whom  they  were  taken-
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  323
proper  care  of,  and  forwarded  into  Moulmein.  On  the  evening  prior to  their  departure,  they  went  to  see  Major  Tickell,  to  whose  charge they  were  entrusted,  and  appeared  to  be  in  particularly  high  spirits, patting  him  and  others  on  the  back,  with  the  utmost  good  humour, and  talking  to  each  other  in  (to  us)  an  unintelligible  language. "When  brought  before  Major  Tickell  on  their  return,  they  appeared just  as  good-humoured  as  ever,  quite  unabashed  and  unconscious  of having  done  wrong.  They  were  very  hungry  when  first  taken,  as might  be  supposed,  and  submitted  unrepiningly  to  their  destiny,  very probably  conscious  that  they  had  escaped  a  worse  evil.
Moulmein,  June  10th,  1861.
*****
The  following  memoranda,  relative  to  the  three  Andamanese  in the  charge  of  Major  Tickell,  when  Deputy  Commissioner  of  Amherst, Tenasserim,  in  1861,  are  republisheil  (in  an  abbreviated  form)  from the  original  account  in  the  Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal.
By  Colonel  S.  R.  Tickell  :—
In  May  1861  three  Andamanese  who  had  been  captured  near Port  Blair,  some  time  previously,  and  sent  over  to  Rangoon  by  the Superintendent,  Major  Haughton,  for  educational  purposes,  were placed  in  my  charge  by  Colonel  Phayre,  at  that  time  Commissioner  of Pegu.
Hitherto  they  had  been  attended  to  by  one  of  the  men  of  the Naval  Brigade  at  Port  Blair,  to  whom  they  seemed  much  attached ; but  they  were  parted  from  their  keeper  at  Rangoon,  and  sent  over  to Moulmein  under  the  care  of  one  of  tbe  officers  of  the  steamer,  who forwarded  them  to  me  on  their  arrival.
They  were  dressed,  when  I  first  saw  them,  in  light  sailors' costume,  slops  and  jumpers  of  white  duck,  and  straw  hats  bound  with black  ribbon  bearing  the  ship's  name  to  which  their  former  guardian had  belonged.
They  could  not  speak  a  single  word  intelligible  to  a  by-stander, and  looked  so  frightened  and  miserable  amongst  new  faces,  that  after many  attempts  at  coaxing  and  cheering  them  up,  I  considered  the
2  T  2
324  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
best  plan  to  be,  to  take  them  back  to  the  steamer,  and  re-ship  them for  Rangoon.  One  of  the  small  hack  palankeen  carriages  that  ply in  Moulmein  was  therefore  procured,  into  which  they  got  with alacrity,  fancying,  I  suppose,  that  they  were  to  be  immediately  driven to  Port  Blair,  and  off  they  started  for  the  steamer.  But  I  had  hardly re-entered  the  house  and  commenced  a  letter  to  Colonel  Phayre  about them,  when  back  they  came,  walking  hand-in-hand  with  a  Burman amid  a  crowd  of  people,  and  appearing  as  excited  and  joyful  as  they were  before  dejected.  On  enquiring  the  reason  for  their  return,  I was  told  that,  as  the  carriage  was  proceeding  up  the  road,  they  had espied  a  Burman  whom  they  had  known  in  Port  Blair,  and  overjoyed at  the  sight  of  a  familiar  face,  one  of  them  had  opened  the  door,  and before  the  vehicle  could  be  stopped,  got  out  (thereby  receiving  a rough  fall  on  the  ground),  and  embraced  his  old  friend,  whom  they all  three  accompanied  back  to  my  house,  in  great  glee,  laughing, patting  him  on  the  breast,  and  putting  their  arms  round  his  neck. That  same  evening  I  engaged  bis  services  to  take  the  immediate charge  of  the  Andamanese,  and  for  the  rest  of  their  stay  at  Moulmein, they  lived  under  his  roof.  The  arrangement  was  particularly  con- venient, as  the  Burman,  "Moung  Shway  Hman, "  speaks  English, which  it  was  proposed  to  teach  the  Andamanese,  and  is  a  man  of steady  habits  and  good  character.
(From  this  it  would  appear  that  friendly  relations  had  already been  to  a  certain  extent  established  between  individuals  in  Port  Blair and  the  Andamanese. — M.  V.  P.)
(Major  Tickell  was  not  able  to  agree  with  an  opinion  which  has been  more  than  once  published,  that  the  Andamanese  have  no  affinity to  the  African  race.  He  thought,  on  the  contrary,  that  they  appeared to  be  very  closely  allied.  He  did  not  think  that  the  small  ear  and  less gross  lips  were  sufficient  data  on  which  to  add  a  fifth  to  the  four great  divisions  of  mankind.  He  thought  that  the  Negritos  in  the interior  of  the  Philippines  were  of  the  same  race  as  the  Andamanese, and  that,  further  to  the  southward,  the  ferocious  savages  in  the interior  of  Sumatra,  from  whose  hands  Madame  Pfeiffer  had  so  provi- dential an  escape,  were  also  probably,  the  same,  though  her  description
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  325
was  not  sufficiently  detailed  for  us  to  judge.  He  adds  that :  "  How the  so-called  Papuans  came  to  be  separated  from  the  African  race and  spread  through  the  Eastern  Archipelago,  is  a  matter  for  con- jecture."
(After  the  above  speculative  digression,  which  in  the  original  paper occupies  a  great  deal  of  space,  Major  Tickell  proceeds  with  his  narra- tive.— M.  V.  P.)
Our  three  friends  were  named  at  Port  Blair,  "  Crusoe,  "  "  Jumbo,  " and  "Friday,"  and  were  labelled  accordingly;  each  name  being stamped  on  a  tin  medal  worn  round  its  owner's  neck.  The  reason  for this  was  that  the  Andamanese,  as  far  as  is  known,  have  no  proper names  for  each  other,  and  readily  adopt  those  which  are  thus  given to  them.
(The  Andamanese  have  proper  names,  but  are  very  ready  to  adopt nick-names. — M.  V.  P.)
On  arrival  at  Moulmein  all  three  had  bad  coughs,  and  Crusoe  and Jumbo  evident  phthisical  symptoms.  Crusoe's  health  improved  after some  time,  but  Jumbo  gradually  grew  worse,  and  his  malady  was  greatly increased  from  exposure  during  inclement  weather,  in  an  attempt  to escape,  which  he  and  his  companions  made  one  stormy  night.  They made  their  way  in  a  native  canoe  towards  the  mouth  of  the  Moulmein river,  but  were  glad  in  three  or  four  days  to  return  under  the  guidance of  the  village  police  to  Moulmein.  Jumbo  never  rallied  from  the effects  of  this,  and  died  in  the  jail  hospital  on  the  12th  June,  nearly a  month  after  his  arrival.  Hia  comrades  repaired  to  the  hospital,  and showed  signs  of  genuine  grief  at  his  death.
(They  also  performed  some  singular  ceremonies  over  the  body, which,  owing  to  precipitate  measures,  taken  without  reference  to  Major Tickell,  to  prepare  the  skeleton  of  the  deceased  for  the  Asiatic  Society's Museum,  he  was  not  able  to  witness.  Whenever  Andamanese  are  taken away  from  their  own  country,  even  to  another  part  of  the  Andamans, they  at  first  become  sick.  If  they  survive  this  sickness,  they  do  well, but  there  is  always  a  risk  even  in  bringing  Onge"s  from  the  Little Andaman  to  Port  Blair  owing  to  the  effect  produced  on  them  by  the exposure,  change  of  diet  and  surroundings,  habits,  etc.— M.  V.  P.)
326  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
(Of  the  three  captives  Crusoe,  the  oldest,  who  was  apparently  about 35  years  of  age,  was  the  only  one  who  showed  any  moroseness  of disposition.  Jumbo  was  of  a  cheerful,  gentle  nature ;  and  Friday,  the youngest,  who  was  about  18  or  20,  was  very  lively,  good-tempered,  and fond  of  Shway  Hman,  and  Major  Tickell.  The  Andamanese  came frequently  to  Major  Tickell 's  house,  and  were  allowed  free  access  to every  part  of  Moulmein.  Their  curiosity  at  every  new  object  was  <>reat but  evanescent.  They  soon  tired  of  everything,  and  when  left  alone relapsed  into  dejection,  making  unintelligible  speeches  with  lament- able signs,  which  evidently  had  a  reference  to  a  return  to  their  own country.
Some  time  after  Jumbo's  death  Crusoe  showed  consumptive  symp- toms to  a  degree  which  made  Major  Tickell  despair  of  ever  getting him  back  alive  among  his  own  countrymen,  but  he  rallied  during  the heavy  rains,  and  left  Moulmein  for  Port  Blair  fairly  well.  Friday, after  getting  over  a  cough  which  at  first  troubled  him,  remained  robust to  the  time  of  his  departure.  Major  Tickell  notes  that  it  is  an  extra- ordinary fact  that  savages  accustomed  from  birth  to  go  naked,  or nearly  so,  contract  pulmonary  diseases  if  forced  to  wear  clothing. (This  has  been  remarked  in  Australia  and  the  South  Sea  Islands. — M.  V.  P.)
Crusoe's  height  was  5  feet  1J  inches  ;  Friday's,  4  feet  9|  inches. The  former  was  of  a  spare  frame,  to  which  may  be  partly  attributed his  pneumonia.  Friday  was  square,  muscular,  and  deep-chested.  Both have  small  hands  and  feet,  which,  with  their  foreheads,  are  cicatrised all  over  with  the  scratches  inflicted  on  themselves  as  a  cure  for  all manner  of  pains  and  aches;  and  the  feet  of  •  both  had  a  constant oadematous  appearance,  with  small  feeble  toes  wide  apart,  as  if  they were  never  much  used  to  pedestrian  exercise.
(Their  foreheads  were  bled  for  headaches,  but  the  other  cicatrices were  the  Andamanese  form  of  tattooing. — M.  V.  P.)
Both  occasionally  complained  of  headache,  and  would  then  smell with  avidity  at  salts,  stuff  their  nostrils  with  leaves  freshly  plucked, or,  as  a  last  resource,  score  their  foreheads  with  a  knife  or  piece  of broken  glass  till  they  bled  pretty  freely.  They  were  much  averse  to
WITH  THE  ANDAMANKSK.
327
taking  our  medicines,  and  Crusoe  on  one  occasion  threatened  his Burman  keeper  with  a  knife  for  trying  to  administer  some  nauseous dose.  Neither  of  them  would  take  to  learning  English.  They  repeated like  parrots  the  words  we  endeavoured  to  make  them  understand,  and at  last  grew  so  averse  to  their  schooling  that  at  any  attempt  to  recom- mence it  they  would  feign  fatigue  or  sickness  like  any  truant  school boy.
They  were  in  fact  too  old  to  learn,  and  although  Friday  was  smart and  intelligent,  he  showed  it  more  by  his  extraordinary  powers  of mimicry  than  by  learning  anything  useful.  This  persistence  in  imi- tating every  gesture  and  every  sound  of  the  voice  made  it  particularly difficult  to  obtain  from  him  the  Anrlamanese  name  of  even  any  visible object.
(This  description  of  the  manners  of  the  Andainanese  is  very  correct. —M.  V.  P.)
Those  entered  in  the  annexed  vocabulary  have  been  elicited  with no  small  labour  and  patience  by  myself  and  Shway  Hman.  I succeeded  in  obtaining  the  names  of  a  variety  of  fishes  common  to  the Bay  of  Bengal,  by  showing  coloured  drawings  of  them,  but  of  quad- rupeds they  appeared  to  be  perfectly  ignorant,  the  only  mammal  they seemed  to  know  was  pig,  "  Rogo,"  and  this  name  they  applied indifferently  to  cattle,  ponies,  elephants,  deer,  and  monkeys.
They  appeared  also  to  have  very  few  names  for  birds,  and  when shown  the  pictures  of  some  which  I  knew  to  be  found  at  the  Andamans, merely  attempted  to  imitate  the  notes  of  any  species  they  might have  had  in  their  minds  at  the  time.
(This  is  correct.  They  make  little  use  of  birds,  so  do  not  trouble about  them,  only  knowing  a  few  by  their  notes,  or  the  legends  con- nected with  them,  etc. — M.  V.  P.)
To  judge  by  Crusoe  and  Friday,  the  Andamanese  are  not  a  timid race.  (They  are  very  independent. — M.  V.  P.)
They  mingled  unconcernedly  among  crowds  of  people,  and  at  first used  to  help  themselves  to  anything  they  took  a  fancy  to  off  the  stalls in  the  bazar.  When  teased  with  the  numbers  looking  at  them, Crusoe  would  stride  towards  the  throng,  waving  them  off,  and  calling
328  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
out  in  Burmese,  "  alloong  thwa  "  (go  all).  They  took  great  pleasure in  the  Pways,  or  Burmese  dances,  and  learnt  to  imitate  the  perform- ances with  marvellous  exactness,  to  the  great  delight  of  the  Burmese, who  crowded  to  see  them.  Sometimes  they  exhibited  their  own national  dance,  which  appears  to  consist  solely  in  lifting  their  clenched fists  above  their  heads,  and  kicking  the  ground  rapidly  and  forcibly with  their  heels.  (Not  a  very  good  description  of  the  dance. — M.  V.  P.)
It  has  a  peculiarly  savage  effect ;  but  having  apparently  excited great  mirth  amongst  the  spectators,  Crusoe  and  Friday  took  offence  at such  notice,  and  latterly  never  repeated  their  exhibitions.  They  used frequently  to  ride  in  hack  carriages,  and  would  walk  up  to  a  pony  and hug  it,  though  sometimes  narrowly  escaping  a  bite.
(They  have  a  natural  fondness  for  animals. — M.  V.  P.) When  first  taken  to  see  some  steam  saw  mills  where  elephants  were employed  in  stacking  timber,  they  showed  no  alarm  at  the  huge animals,  although  the  first  they  had  ever  seen,  and  Friday  was  about to  walk  up  to  and  pat  a  large  tusker,  when  the  bystanders  restrained him.  Of  fire-arms,  or  of  anything  explosive,  however,  they  seemed  to have  some  dread.  (Having  probably  suffered  from  those  of  the  Malay slavers. — M .  V.  P.]  Latterly  they  learnt  very  well  the  use  of  money, and  any  cash  in  their  possession  was  usually  spent  in  the  purchase  of pork  or  other  meat  at  the  Chinaman's  shops.  Fruit  (except  plantains) or  sweets,  they  cared  little  for ;  but  were  very  fond  of  tea  prepared  in the  English  way.  Fish  they  were  indifferent  to,  also  rice,  but  they ate  a  great  deal  of  meat  and  yams,  making  three  hearty  meals  a  day. I  generally  gave  them  a  fowl  when  they  visited  me,  and  for  which they  took  care  to  ask  by  calling  out  "kookroo  koo,"  and  imitating the  cries  of  poultry.  They  killed  the  fowl  by  pressing  the  chest  and neck,  and  swinging  it  round  and  round.  They  would  pluck,  clean,  and boil  it,  their  usual  mode  of  cooking  anything.  Occasionally,  they boiled  meat  on  the  fire,  but  never  eat  any  animal  substance  raw. They  never  cooked  for  themselves  if  they  could  induce  their  keeper's wife,  "  Ma  Shway,"  to  save  them  the  trouble.  At  my  house  they were  allowed  to  sit  at  the  breakfast  table,  where  they  behaved  with
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  329
decorum,  but  quite  at  their  ease ;  lolling  back  in  their  chairs,  and pointing  towards  anything  they  wanted.  They  learnt  to  use  a  spoon, knife,  and  fork  readily.
In  their  visits  to  me  I  useJ  to  remark  that  Crusoe  on  first  arriving would  shout  out  something  in  his  loud,  harsh  voice.  It  occurred  so often  that  I  am  inclined  to  think  the  act  analogous  to  a  custom  in  some parts  of  Ireland  amongst  the  peasantry,  where  a  man  on  entering  a cottage  calls  out  "  Good  luck  to  all  here.  "  I  have  never  been  able to  ascertain  what  it  was  that  Crusoe  said  on  these  occasions.
(The  Andamanese  have  no  such  custom. — M.  V.  P.)
As  I  have  before  remarked  these  people  appear  to  have  no  proper names,  When  one  called  to  the  other  it  was  with  a  shout  of  "Hy,  " much  as  is  used  in  hailing  a  cabstand.
Occasionally,  however,  they  named  each  other  Crusoe  and  Friday, and  invariably  spoke  of  their  country  as  "  Blair.  "  They  learnt  my name,  but  usually  addressed  me  as  "  Ma-ey  "  (Oh  man)  ;  nevertheless, it  is  difficult  to  conceive  how  any  community  can  carry  on  intercourse without  the  aid  of  proper  names,  both  to  persons  and  places,  and  I  am not  aware  that  such  a  strange  deficiency  has  been  observed  in  the language  of  any  other  tribe,  however  savage.
("  Blair,  "  as  a  name  for  the  Andamans,  the  Andamanese  must  have learnt  from  their  Naval  Brigade  Guard.  Mala  is  an  honorific  equal  to the  English  "  Sir."— M.  V.  P.)
Although  most  pertinacious  beggars,  and  glad  to  take  anything offered  them,  their  cupidity  was  chiefly  shown,  for  iron,  of  which  they took  with  them  from  Moulmein  a  large  quantity  in  the  shape  of knives,  forks,  das,  or  Burmese  choppers,  nails,  scissors,  hammers,  and needles.  They  frequently  sat  for  hours  watching  the  blacksmiths  at work,  and  also  learnt  to  ply  the  needle  with  some  skill,  and  to  use scissors.  As  they  acquired  a  strong  liking  for  clothing,  it  is  possible they  will  not  willingly  return  to  their  old  habits  of  nudity,  and  so will  find  their  sartorial  accomplishments  of  advantage.  Although  I procured  them  a  quantity  of  the  coarse  kind  of  the  tackle  used  for  sea- angling,  they  took  no  interest  in  its  use  ;  which  is  the  more  singular,
g30  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
as  in  their  native  state  they  are  most  expert  fishermen,  especially  in spearing  fish.
(In  shooting,  not  spearing  fish,  and  they  never  angle  with  hooks and  lines.  Their  clothes  were  discarded  the  moment  they  returned  to their  native  jungles. — M.  V.  P.)
Friday  procured  a  bow  and  some  arrows  with  which  I  met  him one  day  armed,  marching  up  the  street  at  the  head  of  a  posse  of  idle boys ;  but  I  never  had  an  opportunity  of  witnessing  his  skill  at archery.  He  had  seen  guns  fired,  but  never  attempted  to  use  one himself.  They  were  both  expert  swimmers,  their  mode  of  progression being  with  the  arms  and  legs  alternately,  the  former  under  water  ; not  striking  out  like  an  Englishman,  nor  throwing  one  arm  out  after another  like  the  generality  of  continental  Europeans.  They  could manage  a  Burmese  canoe  with  ease ;  but  never  occupied  themselves with  paddling  about  for  amusement.  They  evinced  great  pleasure  in making  short  trips  into  the  interior  with  their  conductor,  visiting the  numerous  orchards  and  villages  in  the  vicinity  of  Moulmein. And  as  the  arrival  of  the  mail  steamer  invariably  renewed  their hankering  after  their  own  country,  I  used  latterly  to  send  them  away during  the  stay  of  the  vessel  in  port,  and  having  found  out  their  name for  the  moon  "  Chookleyro  "  (a  certain  phase  of  the  moon,  i.e.,  first quarter. — M.  V.  P.)  I  was  able  generally  to  soothe  them  when  much dejected,  by  repeating  the  word,  and  "  Blair  kado, "  (go  to  Blair), and  holding  up  as  many  fingers  as  I  supposed  might  mark  the number  of  months  they  were  likely  to  stay.
(They  would  have  understood  this. — M.  V.  P.)
They  were  fond  of  tobacco,  and  such  snuff  as  was  procurable  in the  bazaar,  but  owing  to  the  state  of  Crusoe's  lungs,  smoking  was  not allowed  to  him  latterly.  They  seemed  to  take  pleasure  in  having  the scanty,  frizzly  wool  of  their  heads  shaved  off,  an  operation  which  was several  times  performed  on  them.  (They  are  very  particular  about this  in  their  natural  state,  as  the  long  hair  harbours  vermin,  which are  uncomfortable. — M.  V.  P.)
They  were  very  docile  in  learning  habits  of  cleanliness  ;  bathing every  clay,  using  soap,  and  getting  their  clothes  washed,  cleaning  their
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  33}
plates  after  meals,  sweeping  the  floor,  etc.  To  "  Ngapee  "  they  could never  be  reconciled.  (They  will  eat  no  meat  which  is  at  all  high  or tainted. — M.  V.  P.)  Besides  the  phlebotomising  operation  already described,  they  used  when  in  pain,  and  also  when  feeling  chilly,  to apply  heated  stones  to  the  afflicted  part,  and  on  such  occasions  would huddle  together  close  to  the  fire.  They  shewed  great  pleasure  at  the sight  of  English  children,  and  would  kiss  and  fondle  them,  if  the  little folks  permitted  it.  To  Burmese  children  also  they  evinced  great  par- tiality, and  frequently  caressed  Shway  Hman's  daughter,  a  child about  five  years  of  age.  Their  grief  at  the  death  of  their  comrade Jumbo  was  great,  but  not  lasting.
When  the  time  came  for  these  poor  creatures  to  return  to  their own  country  and  it  was  explained  to  them  that  they  were  to  go,  which was  chiefly  done  by  patting  them  on  the  back,  with  a  smiling  counte- nance, and  repeating  the  words  "  Blair  kado"  without  the  ominous fingers  indicating  the  moons  yet  intervening,  their  delight  is  not  to be  described.  For  the  two  nights  previous  to  their  departure  from Amherst  where  they  were  to  embark  on  board  the  Tubal  Cain  they lay  awake  and  singing,  and  had  all  their  property  carefully  packed and  put  under  their  pillows.  But  at  the  moment  of  departure  they showed  unwillingness  to  leave  Shway  Hman's  wife  behind,  and  when on  board  the  ship,  were  disconsolate  at  their  Burman  friend  himself  not accompanying  them.  Fortunately,  they  met  there  Lieutenant  Hellard, I.  N.,  whom  they  knew,  and  also  a  sailor  of  the  Naval  Brigade  at  Port Blair,  who  had  formerly  had  charge  of  them  and  to  whom  they  were much  attached,  and  under  the  care  of  these  kind  friends  they  reached their  native  country  safely,  and  were,  with  all  their  traps,  put  on  the shore  at  a  spot  on  the  beach  they  pointed  out,  and  quickly  vanished into  the  jungle.
Nothing  further  has  been  heard  of  them.  For  a  long  time  they were  supposed  to  have  been  murdered  by  their  countrymen  for  the sake  of  the  precious  iron  articles  they  had  with  them,  and  it  is  not known  if  this  is  true.
(They  lived  long  afterwards,  and  the  whole  affair  was  most judiciously  conducted,  as  from  what  they  had  seen  and  then  related
202
332
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
to  their    countrymen,   the  others  realised  our  power,  and   friendly relations  were  established. — H.  V.  P.)
The  experiment  of  civilising  these  two,  by  weaning  them  from their  wild  habits  and  creating  artificial  wants,  to  supply  which  should involve  the  necessity  of  frequent  visits  to  the  Settlement,  and  thus form  as  it  were  the  nucleus  of  increasing  intercourse  with  a  superior race,  has  certainly  so  far  failed.
(It  bad  not  at  all  failed.  Sufficient  time  had  not  been  allowed  for the  results  of  the  visit  to  Moulrnein  to  impress  the  others,  and  too much  was  expected  in  too  short  a  time — a  fault  which  has  been repeated  in  later  days.  The  Andamanese  are  suspicious,  timid,  and slow  to  change. — M.  V.  P.)
With  younger  subjects  we  might  have  succeeded  better,  particu- larly in  teaching  them  English  ;  but  probably  so  at  the  expense  of their  o\vn  language  and  of  their  own  habits,  to  such  a  degree,  that  as interpreters  or  channels  of  communication  with  the  natives,  they would  have  been  as  useless  as  Crusoe  and  .Friday.  'It  remains  to  be seen  what  effects  will  by  and  by  arise  from  the  repeated  interviews between  the  aborigines  and  our  people.  Unfortunately,  these  are  fre- quently of  anything  but  an  amicable  nature,  and  tend  rather  to  widen than  to  bridge  over  the  gulf  between  them.  Indeed,  if  the  inference be  correct  that  the  inhabitants  are  of  the  same  race  as  the  Negritos
o
of  the  Phillipines,  who  to  this  day  keep  entirely  aloof  from  the  settlers on  the  coast,  we  may  surmise  that  the  colonisation  of  the  Andaman Islands,  when  its  spread  begins  to  interfere  with  the  aborigines,  will tend  rather  to  the  extermination  of  the  latter,  than  to  any  ameliora- tion in  their  condition.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  since  the  days  of Colonel  Haughton  very  little  information  is  published  regarding  our relations  with  this  truly  savage  people.
Rangoon,  July  28th,  1863.
Crusoe  and  Friday  spoke  the  Aka-.Z?<?Vda  dialect,  and  the  words given  will  be  considered  with  reference  to  that  dialect  only.
Major  Tickell  notes  "  that  some  of  these  phrases  are  only  inferen- tially  derived,  that  is,  from  their  constant  recurrence  under  like
WITH  THE  ANDAMANfiSE.
S33
circumstances.  When  Crusoe  or  Friday  was  hunting  about  for  any- thing a'id  could  not  find  it,  they  used  to  say  in  a  vexed  tone,  "  Kyta hya. "  If  offered  anything,  they  would,  when  refusing  it,  in  an affirmative  manner,  say  "  Gada"  as  if  they  had  it  already,  and  so  on. It  is  very  possible  then  that  many  of  these  phrases  are  not  literally rendered."
Major  Tickell  had  some  reputation  as  a  linguist,  and  I  have  been careful  to  publish  and  correct  the  accounts  and  vocabularies  of  the Andamanese  written  by  would-be  scientific  observers,  in  order  to  show how  very  incorrect  an  idea  a  person  may  form  of  savages  with  whom  he has  but  a  short  acquaintance.  I  show  below  how  incorrect  and valueless  Major  Tickell's  vocabulary  is,  and  have  little  doubt  that  the numberless  similar  short  accounts  of  other  savages,  and  their  vocabu- laries, published  by  casual  visitors  to  their  countries,  are  equally valueless  and  incorrect,  and  would  warn  students  against  them.
It  should  be  remembered  that  such  accounts  as  Major  Tickell's and  Dudhnath's,  (also  Dr.  Day's  and  Admiral  Becher's  given later  on),  have  been,  and  still  are,  accepted  as  correct  by  those anthropologists  who  are  not  engaged  in  original  research  ;  and  dogmas are  laid  down,  and  theories  enunciated  by  leading  scientific  men, which  are  incorrect,  being  founded  on  incorrect  data  :
Kn<rlish.
Andamanese  given  by Tickell.
Remarks.
Fish
Do
This  may  be  the  Urdu  word for  "  give, "  or  may  be an  abbreviation  of "  Odgaia"  "much"  in Andamanese.  "  Ydt "  is the  Andamanese  word  for "  Eish.  "
334
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
English.
Andamanese  given  by Tickell.
Remarks.
Man
Ma
This  may  be  the  short  for
"  Mala  "  an  Andamanese
Honorific  meaning  "  Sir,"
and  used  when  speaking
to,  or  of,  an  elderly  man.
Friday     would      address
Crusoe  as  "  Mala.  "     The
Andamanese^  word      for
Woman
Ghana
This  word  is  the  correspon-
ding Honorific  used  when
speaking    of,    or    to,   an
elderly      woman.        The
Andamanese    word      for
"  woman  "   is   "  A.\>-pdll-
da".
Water.    Eain
Pano    .
Evidently  the  Urdu  word
"Pani";    the  Andama-
nese words  being,  "  Ina  "
for  "  water,  "  and  "  Yum"
for  "  rain.  "
Moon     .
Chookleyro    .
This  may  be  either  of  two
words.   It  may  be  intend-
ed   for     "  Chiloko-lero  "
"a  young  moon,  "  or  for
"  Kukli-re  "  "  I  have  for-
gotten. "     It  is  probably the  former.
The   Andamanese    generic
word      for      "  Moon  "  is
"  Ogar-fa.  "
Yam     .         .         .
Ghatee
The  Andamanese  word  for
one    species    of    Yam   is
•
"  Chdti.  "
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
335
English.
Andamanese  given  by
Remarks.
Tickell.
Plantains
Eng-ngeyra
The  Andamanese  word  for
Plantains    is    "  Angara-
da."
lope     .
Allak.      (Bengali  ?
Bdtmo  is  the  Andamanese
X
Alat).
word  for  "a  rope,"   and
the  word  given  may  be,
as  Tickell  suggests,  a  cor-
ruption of  Alat  or  may  be
taken  from  the  Andama-
nese word    for  the  fibre
from    which  the  rope  is
made  "  Maba-da.  "
!>ocoa-nut       .
Jayda  .
The  Andamanese  word  is
"JMer."
lice  (unboiled)
Anakit
This    word  is  not   under-
stood at  all,   unless  the
exclamation    of   surprise,
"Ana-ke'ta"     was    used.
In  this,   and  several    of
the  following  words,   the
Andamanese    may     have
been    trying    to    imitate
something  said  to  them
in  Burmese  or  some  other
foreign  language.     There
is  no  word  for    Rice  in
Andamanese.
\.  stick
Erreybat
This  is  not  understood.
>pit,  to                     .
Moochee
This  may  be  intended  for
the    Andamanese     word
"  M6icho  "  "  we.  "
\.  pot    .         .         •
Tok
This    is    not      understood.
"  T6g  "  is  "  a  Torch  "  in
Andamanese.
336
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  GELATIONS
English.
Andamanese  given  by Tickell.
Remarks.
String    .
Garrik
This    is    not      understood. "  Gdri-kc"  is   "to   take
care  "  in  Andamanese.
Cock.     Poultry
Kookroo.    (Bengali)
There  is  no  word  in  Anda- manese for  "  poultry.  "
Plate  or  dish
Wyda  .
This   is  evidently  intended for"  TTdi-da,"  "Yes."
Hat.     Cover
Seytey  T6k    .
This    is     not    understood. The  Andamanese  have  no
word  for  "a  hat.  "
A  carriage
Raik.     (?)     .
This  may    he    meant    for "R6ko"      "a      canoe."
The  Andamanese  have  no
word  for  "  a  carriage.  "
Knife.     Sword
Koona
"  Kauno  "      is     "  an    iron knife  "  in  Andamanese.
Pig.     Pork     .
Rogo    .
Correct.
Noon  or  Sun
Aleyburdra   .
This  may    he    meant    for "  Bodo-da  "     the  .  Anda-
manese   word    for    "the
Sun.  "
A  sore    .
Angoonchoon
This  is  derived  from  three •words.  "  'Ong-on-c^MH*.  "
"  His-of-sore.  "
Fire
Chaukay
This  is  evidently  meant  for "  Choki  "  "  Cold.  "
Firewood
Chapa
Correct.     Chdpa.
Meat.     Flesh
Rek  dama
"Reg    ddma"   is     "pig's flesh."
Bread    .         .
Ochata
"  6t-cheta  "  "a  head"   is here  meant.     The   Anda- manese speak  of  a  loaf  as "  R6ti  (Urdu)-l'6t-c/je7a."
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
337
English.
Boiled  rice
A  cheroot A  snake
Abow  .
Broken  bits  of  glass
Needles, heads, iron.
Smoke Maize
Arrow- Bits     of
A  rat
Bones    .
Sugarcane
Andamaneee  given  by Tickell.
Chata  .
Dakanapo Wangada
Kararna Beramato
T61b6t
Moralitorkay Oodala
Itnachamma
Tato
Teeree
Remarks.
"OMta,"  "ahead"  may also  he  meant  here  as applying  to  each  grain  of rice.
This  is  not  understood.
"  JFanga-da,  "  is  the  Anda- manese  word  for  one kind  of  poisonous  snake.
Correct.
" Sera-fa"  "Sparks"  or "  glittering  fragments  " may  he  here  meant.
a "  is  "iron."
y'i-tdur-k&. ascends."
"  Smoke
"  Udala-fa"  is  the  Anda- manese  word  for  the  Pan- danus  fruit,  which  might be  thought  by  the  Anda- manese  to  resemble  a  head of  maize.
"#-da"  is  "a  Mouse." "  Ndlchama  "  is  "sharp" or  "  pointed."
"  Td-fa"
s
bon"
Andamanese.
n
Tedi,"  tiie  Andamanese name  for  a  plant  similar in  appearance,  may  be meant.
338
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
English.
Andamanese  given  by Tickell.
Remarks.
Sweet  things Little  Girl      ,
Little  Boy
Flower
Ship
A  spider
A  mosquito  ,
Tongue,  the  .
A  tooth,  ,
Jong     . Chanjihal
Majibal
Cheyda
Cheyley
Nyonada Taylay Kytala Toka  doobda
A  "knee
Lo
This    is    not      understood.
"  Chdna,"  a  woman.  "Ed- Is,"  "  small,"  may  he meant.
Similarly  « Mdia-bd-lv,," "  a  small  man,"  may  be meant.  Such  expressions as  the  above  are  now  ap- plied to  the  children  of Europeans.
The  Andamanese  may  have disliked  the  smell  of  the flower,  or  may  have,  as  is their  habit,  intentionally insulted  and  misled  their questioner.  "  C/je'-da" means  «  Dung."
"  Chelewa-fa"  "a  ship" is  meant.
"  Nydnga-d.&"  is  the  correct word.
"Teil-fa"is  the  correct word,
"Aka-e?7a?-da "  is  « the Tongue. "
"Auko-%-da"       is      *<a
tooth. " "  Auko-cZ«<&M-da  "      means
"  Affectionate  "  or  "  good-.
tempered. "
Correct.
WITH  THK  ANDAHANESE.
English.
Audamanese  given  by Tickell.
Remarks.
Blood    .
Hair      . A  foot  .
A  nose  . An  ear
An  eye
A  band  .
Bits  of  cloth  .
A  gun   .
A  star   .         .
A  stone Wax      .
The  head To-morrow
Pay      .
Eppee  . Onkono
Incharonga
Pogo    .
Edala   . Gogo    .
Hollo   , Birma  .         . Chittooree     ,
Tylee   . Pyda    .
Pylee-da        , Garra  .
"2V-da"  means  "Blood." "  Pa*-da  "  means  "  a  lip," which  might  have  been the  thing  bleeding.
"Pich-da.  "  means  "hair.  "
'Gn-kduro,  "his  hand," may  be  meant.
"  'I'chduronga-dia,"  means "  his  nose.  "
"  Ik-pd&o-da,"  means  "  tie ear."
"  I-efeZ-da  "  means  "  an eye."
"JTauro-da"  meana  "a hand."
This  is  not  understood. Correct,  "  -Btma-da."
a  "     means     "a
star." Correct,  "
Perhaps  "  JP/cA-da  "  from "  Aja-pich  (or  ^)-da" "  Beeswax  "  is  meant.  "
a  "  "  the  back   of the  head  "  is  meant.
G^ara-da"     means    "the earth."
2s  2
310
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
Adjectives  or  Participles.
English.
Andamanese  given  by Tickell.
Remarks.
Cold  (as  meat)
Chipped
Lost,  or  concealed  . Cold  (as  weather)     .
Spilt Unripe
Hot
Itching
Mauriwada    ,
Lokkaruen     .
Kytalaya Tatay  .
Kaupilay Potowyk
Deggaralak   . Dowkodoblak
This  is  not  understood. "J/afwo-da  "  means  "the sky."
This     is     not    understood.
"  Log  Mmin"  means  "the
way  is  here." "  Aka-to7«6a-da  "     «  lost  "
may  he  meant,
This  is  not  understood. "  Chduki-da,  "  means "  cold."
This  is  not  understood. "  Ktipila  "  means  "  over yonder."
This  is  not  understood. "  Putungdlj  "  or  "  CMm- iti  "  are  words  for  "  un- ripe."
This  is  not  understood. "  tfya-da  "  means  "hot."
means stomach
*'  to     cut    the
Good
Ooba
open."  There  must  have been  a  misunderstanding here.  The  Andamanese may  have  been  threaten- ing the  questioner,  who gave  the  threat  as  the word  for  "  Itching."  I have  known  such  a  case.
"  tfba"  means  "Yes."
WITH  THE  ANDAMA^ESE,
341
English.
Andamanesc  given  by Tickell.
Remarks.
Bad
Tired      . Dead
Ooka  ooba
Odoola Awalay
"Yes"  is meant.  The  Andamanese here  again  evidently merely  answered  "  Yes  " to  the  questioner.
This  is  not  understood. This  is  not  understood.
Verbs.
English.
Andamanese  given  l>y Tickell.
Remarks.
To  sit     .
•
Deedo  .
"  Ika-ddi-ke'  "  means  "  to
sit."
To  sleep
Mamee
"Jfaww-ke""      means   "to
sleep."     "  Mdmi"  is  the
Imperative.
fu
To  take  .
Nya     .
"Na"    is   an  exclamation
meaning  "  Here  you  are,"
or  "Take  this,"  etc.,    ac-
cording to  the    gestures
given   with   it,   and    the
context.
Togo     .
Kado    .
"  Kdto  "  means  "  There."
This    was    probably    the
\vord    given,    but   "  Kd'
dol  ?  "  meaning  "  Do  you
mean  me  "  ?    may   have
been  said.
To  come
Ka  meeka     .
"  Kdmin    kdich"    "Come
here,"  may  be  meant.
342
A  HISTORY  OF  OUE  RELATIONS
English.
Andamanese  given  by Tickell.
Remarks.
To  bring To  walk
Taw      . Dikleer
This  is  not  understood.
"D'/&,"  "With  me," "ifo-kd"  "to  stroll."
To  dance
Tykpa
Correct,  "  Tikpd-k6."
To  throw  away
Apay    .
"Depi-'k.Q  "  means  "to  throw away."
To  vomit
Dadway        .
"Jfdtce-ke,"  "To  vomit."
To  bathe
Darcha          .         .
"  Ad-c/ia^-ke,"  "To  bathe oneself."
To  cut  .
Kauppa
"  K6p-\i&  "  means  "To cut."
To  give
Jay      ...
"Je"  is  an  exclamation, meaning  "  Give  me," ''Quickly,"  "Do  it,"  etc., according  to  the  accom- panying gestures  and  con- text.
To  broil,  to  roast     .
Pdwet  .         .         4
"  Puwu-k&"  means  "To blow  the  fire  into  a  blaze," and  this  word  may  be intended.
Adverbs-
English.
Andamanese  given  by Tickell.
Remarks.
Much    . No         ...
Tad      . Tabada          .         .
"  Dogaia  "  means  "  much." "  Ydt"  means  "Fish." There  is  an  evident  mis- understanding here.
Correct,  "  Tdba-Aa,"  means "Not,"  "No."
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
343
Phrases-
English.
Andamanese  given  by Tickell.
Remarks.
Sit  a  little Much  fish
Stomach  full Don't  go
Rain  falls
Put  it  down    .
I  will  remain  here  .
Take  it    (from    an- other)
Let  it  be :    put    it down
I  will  not  give
Tara  Deedo   . Yad  do
Tek  bo
A  kuddo        .
Pano  lappa    .
Gulla  loongdakey Do  palee       .
Nyey  reo
Tota  da Oochin  da
Not  understood.
"  Ydt  ddgala "  would  be correct.
"  Tegbut-i&  "  would  be correct.
Not  understood.  Possibly Akd-doi,  meaning  "  Sit down."
"  Pano  "  is  evidently  from the  Urdu  "Pani."  "Yum- }£-pd-k6,"  "Rain  is  fall- ing."
"  Gara  len  dd-te.". "Ground  on  put  it."
Correct,  "  D6  pdli."
An  exclamation  meaning (when  another  man  asks for  a  thing),  J'  Here  it  is, take  it."  «  Ne-re."
"  T'6te-eZa-ke,"  is  correct.
"tJchin"  merely  means "I  don't  understand," "I  don'fc  know,"  or "What  do  you  mean  ?  " etc.,  according  to  the  con- text, and  is  an  exclama- tion. "Uchin  dd-k£" means  "Don't."
344
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
English.
Andatcanese  given  by Tickell.
Remarks.
Let  it  alone    .
I  will  drink    .
There  is  none
I  want  to  sleep   a little
Stomach  aches
I  don't  wish  to  stay
Boats  are  racing,  or
0>
rowing
I  have  some   . There  is  some
It  is  lost,  or  I  can't find  it
Kookapa
Oowel  lee
Tappee
Tautaro  mameekay
Udda  mookdoo Oopa-do-palee
Arra  choro    . JGada
Kytalaya
This  is  not  understood "ZM-l'&e-pd."  "I  did
not  get  food,"  may  he meant.  Literally  "Heart is  fallen,"  or  "  Hungry."
"  D6  tcelij-te  "  meana  "  I will  drink."
"Tdpi-fa"  "light,"  or  of a  bucket  "empty."
It  seems  as  if  the  Andama- nese  had  learnt  a  little Urdu.  They  now  often speak  a  mixejl  language of  Urdu  and  Aka-.Z?e'a-da, and  what  may  have  heen said  was  "  Do  thora mdmi-V&."  I  little  am going  to  sleep.  (Thora being  Urdu,  and  the  other words  Aka-Z?<?a-da).
This  is  not  understood.
"  Ubadopdli' trary  means going  to  stay
"  on  the  con- "  I  also  am
This  is  not  understood. "JSTrf-da,"  "There  it  is.'
"  Akz-tdlaba,"  "  It  is  lost," were  probably  the  words used.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  345
Tbe  Governor  General  being  anxious  that  particular  attention should  be  paid  to  procuring  a  vocabulary  of  the  commonest  words  of the  Andamanese  language,  with,  if  possible,  the  ordinary  inflections, Major  Haughton  forwarded  all  the  words  and  phrases  which  had been  collected.  They  are  reproduced  here,  not  on  account  of  their value,  for  they  are  often  ludicrously  incorrect,  but  in  order  to  show how  little  value  can  be  attached  to  the  vocabularies  of  savage  races collected  by  mere  visitors  to  their  country.
My  remarks  in  the  third  column  explain  the  mistakes  in  detail.
Towards  the  end  of  October  1861  some  recently  returned  runaway convicts  stated  that  the  Andamanese  had  generally  treated  them kindly,  after  first  plundering  them  of  anything  worth  having,  and  the result  of  this  was  that  the  number  of  escapes  increased.
One  man,  bowever,  returned  on  the  21st  November  with  both  his arms  dreadfully  lacerated  by  a  knife,  apparently  from  wanton  cruelty. His  wounds,  though  severe,  were  not  dangerous.
Major  Haughton  writes  that,  on  the  13th  December  1861,  there was  a  severe  shock  of  earthquake,  and  he  adds  that  storms  prevailed up  to  the  end  of  that  month,  which  he  considered  to  be  unusual.
In  March  1862,  he  visited  the  Middle  Straits,  and  anchored  in the  harbour  on  the  western  coast,  at  the  junction  of  Middle  and Homfray  Strait,  which  he  named  "  Port  Charlotte."  The  island  at the  entrance  of  the  harbour  he  called  "  Canning  Island."  The  exist- ence of  tbis  harbour  seems,  however,  to  have  been  forgotten,  and  it was  re-discovered  in  1883,  when  it  was  called  "  Kwang  Tung Harbour,"  and  the  island  at  the  entrance  was  re-christened  "Spike Island."
Major  Haughton  suspected  the  existence  of  Homfray  Strait,  but bad  not  time  to  examine  it ;  he  saw  the  waterfall  on  the  western  side of  Spike  Island,  and  notes  the  dead  and  decayed  mangrove  trees  in  the Straits.  He  thought  that  the  death  of  these  trees  might  be  due  to the  cyclone  of  18-J4,  but  they  are  now  as  they  then  were,  and  people have  lately  told  me  that  their  death  was  due  to  the  cyclone  of  J  891.  (!)
Major  Haughton  fully  appreciated  the  value  of  "Kwang  Tung Harbour,"  and  it  seems  extraordinary  that  more  notice  was  not  taken
2T
346
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
of  the  discovery  by  the  Marine  authorities  at  the  time.  He  wished to  have  a  Settlement  on  Spike  Island  in  order  to  collect  the  bullet- wood  there,  but  this  was  not  sanctioned  on  account  of  the  danger  the wood-cutting  parties  would  run  from  attacks  by  the  aborigines.
At  this  time,  the  Burmese  convicts,  whom  Major  Haughton characterises  (and  with  justice,  if  they  resemble  the  present  ones)  as "  all  thieves,"  escaped  in  considerable  numbers.  They  got  away  on rafts  to  the  Middle  Straits,  and  there  was  reason  to  suppose  that they  met  the  Malay  birds'  nest  collectors  there,  and,  giving  out  that they  were  shipwrecked  seamen,  were  very  willingly  rescued.  Indeed, the  Malays,  being  themselves  at  the  Andamans  in  defiance  of  the  law, were  not  in  a  position  to  inform  on  the  runaway  convicts.
On  the  6th  April  1862,  the  Chinese  Agent,  who  had  obtained  from Major  Haughton  a  license  for  the  monopoly  of  the  collection  of  edible birds'  nests  in  the  Andamans,  reported  that  a  fully  armed  vessel  was cruising  about  the  islands  and  robbing  the  caves  of  the  nests.  He stated  that  he  called  at  the  Middle  Strait  cave  and  found  no  nests there ;  he  then  went  further  north  and  saw  a  boat  which  fled  but afterwards  returned.  Her  crew  stated  that  they  had  gone  to  Narcon- dam  Island  for  nests,  but  had  been  blown  out  of  their  way  on  to  the Andamans.  The  Chinaman  warned  them  off,  when  they  told  him that  they  were  frequenters  of  the  Andamans,  coming  there  yearly  to obtain  nests,  and  adding  in  a  brazen  manner,  "  there  are  no  real renters,  we  are  all  robbers  together,  and  no  one  has  more  real  right here  than  another,  so  we  will  not  go  away."  It  is  worthy  of  note that  in  giving  his  evidence  in  the  above  case  the  Chinese  collector had  different  Burmese  names,  which  appeared  to  be  well  recognised by  the  native  sailors,  for  all  the  parts  of  the  Andamans  he  visited, even  in  the  straits  and  creeks.  This  is  a  strong  argument  in favour  of  the  theory  that  the  Burmese  and  Malays  had  a  good  deal  to do  with  the  Andamans  before  our  occupation  of  the  islands.  Major Haughton  thought  that  this  might  be  the  same  piratical  Malay  who had  before  attacked  the  people  in  the  caves  on  the  Tenasserim  coast. No  especial  steps  were,  however,  taken  in  the  matter.
In  May  1862  Major  Haughton  proceeded  on  leave,  after  having,
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  347
in  addition  to  his  work  in  the  Penal  Settlement,  laid  the  foundation for  our  future  friendly  relations  with  the  Andaman ese.
Lieutenant-Colonel  E.  C.  Tytler  assumed  officiating  charge  of Port  Blair  in  his  place.
The  following  vocabulary  was  collected  by  Major  Haughton  from Dudhndth  Tewari,  Lieutenant  Hellard,  I.N.,  and  some  men  of  the Naval  Brigade,  and  was  forwarded  to  Calcutta  in  1862,  \vhere  it  was printed.
When  he  was  understood,  Dudnath's  words  are  fairly  correct,  the mistakes  being  probably  owing  to  his  questioner  not  understanding Urdu  well,  and  having  a  defective  ear.
Another  instance  is  thus  afforded  us  of  recognising  that  Budnath was  a  more  reliable  informant  on  Andamanese  matters  than  some  of Ids  critics  would  have  us  believe.
The  words  given  by  the  men  of  the  Naval  Brigade  are  ludicrously incorrect.
The  following  instances  are  worthy  of  special  notice : —
Bad . — Ha-  mackrey .
The  Brigadesman  probably  made  some  gestures  and  pointed  to some  food  with  a  desire  to  arrive  at  the  Andamanese  word  for  "  Bad," but  the  Andamanese,  misunderstanding  him,  and  thinking  he  was enquiring  what  had  become  of  the  food,  replied,  "  &  A  mek-rG."  "  He has  eaten  it."
Bed  quilt. — Dootram.
In  a  similar  manner,  the  Brigadesman  pointed  to  a  bed  quilt  and asked  the  name  for  it.  The  Andamanese  had,  of  course,  no  name  for such  an  article,  and  replied,  "D' (3  t-ram-ke"  "  I  wrap  myself  up  in it."
3?  owl. — Deer.
A  fowl  which  had  been  given  to  the  Andamanese  to  eat  was  pro- bably pointed  to,  and  the  name  asked,  when  the  Andamanese  replied, J>/«-da,"— "  It  is  mine.  "
2r2
348
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
Give.  —  De-  walay.
Water  being  offered  them,  they  said,  "  Do  tc^»';-k6,"  "  I  want  to drink,"  this  being  translated  as  "  give  !  "
Nose.  —  Lanta.
This  word  is  given  by  Dudhnath.  It  is  probable  that  he  pointed to  his  own  nose  in  order  to  ascertain  the  Andamanese  name  for  it, and  the  Andamanese  replied,  "  JJanta-da,"  meaning  "  It  is  hooked," a  mild  form  of  abuse  in  which  they  delight.
Not.  —  Niching-bada.
This  word  is  given  by  Lieutenant  Hellard.
What  he  has  taken  for  "Not"  was  probably  "  M-tchiba-fta," "  What  ?  "
Whiskers.  —  Looka.
The  Brigadesman  evidently  pointed  to  his  own  whiskers,  and  pro- bably then  tapped  the  cheeks  of  the  Andamanese  in  order  to  try  and obtain  their  word  for  "  Whiskers."  They  do  not  grow  any,  so answered  "  Ig-^a-da,"  meaning  "The  part  is  hairless."
Well.—  Bat-kala.
This  word  is  given  by  Dudhnath,  and  in  this  instance  the  mistake would  appear  to  have  arisen  from  the  incorrect  pronunciation  of  Urdii on  the  part  of  his  questioner.
The  latter  wished  to  ascertain  the  word  for
ij  a.  —  A  well. but  was  understood  by  Dudhnath  to  say  —
Kowa.  —  A  crow.
and  Dudhnath  gave  him  the  Andamanese  word  for  "  A  crow,"  "  Hctt- &a-da."
Other  small,  and  equally  incorrect  vocabularies  were  collected  by the  Naval  Brigadesmen  at  this  time,  but  they  are  not  worth  quoting.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
349
English.
Andamancse.
Remarks.
A.
D.
I   have     stomach-
ache .
Jooz-lujam    .
Jodo-Y  'i-chdm,      "  sto-
D.
Head  —  my       head
mach  ache."
aches
Boongee
J3ongi-d&  (fever).
D.
Adze  or  axe  .
Dooloo
W610-&&.
D.
Ankle  ring    ,
Roonee
Rauni-k&,           "  wrap
round  "  —  to.  (Hence,
no   doubt,    the  name
given   to   an   article
wrapped  round    the
ankle,   an  ornament
not  before  known   to
the  Andamanese.)
D.
Arrow—  iron-headed
Aila  (or)  Eyela
£la-A&.
D.
Arrow—  wood  en-
headed        .         .
Rayta
Bdt(t-d&.
D.
Attack  —  an   attack
•will  be  made
Jheyte
Jeti-U,      to      "  hunt
men,"  to  fight.
D.
Attacked  —  How many       attacked,
Yay-chee-buda
Probably     "  HicUba- da."  "What."     The
or      fought,       or
Andamanese  answer-
struck,   or     were
ing    "What?"    be-
killed  ?
cuuse  he  did  not  un-
derstand   what    was
said  to  him.
D.
So  many  attacked,
etc.    .
Kay-chee-kanay-dul
Kichikan-da,           "  so
many."
D.
Ate  —  I  ate  it
Lay-ay
Le-ke,  "  to  eat."
D.
Awake  —  to  be
Bo-ee    .
Boi-ke,  "  to  awake."
350
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
English.
Andamanese.
Remarks.
B.
N.B.
Bad  (not  good)
Ha-mackrey  .
This    is   '"J-mekre."
"  He  has  eaten  it."
D.
Beat  —  to
Doonga-pai-teekoo
Do  ngd  pdMi-ke.  (I  am
going  to  shoot   you.)
The         Andamanese
answer  to  some  one
who  offered  to  beat
him.
D.
I  did  beat,  or  kill  .
Tij       .
Ta^-ke,  "to  shoot  with
an  arrow."
N.B.
Bed  quilt
Dootram
D'6t-rdm,  "  I  wrap  my-
self up."
D.
Belly    .
Joodoo
Jodo-dia.
D.
Boat     .
Gayrin
Gereng-da,  a  tree  from
which      canoes     are
made.       A        canoe
made  from  this  tree
would  be  spoken   of
as  a  "  Gereng-da."
D.
Bottle  .
Beej
Btjma-da.
D.
Bow—  a
Kurma
Koroma-da.
N.B.
»>               •
Boro  gelly     .
Not  understood.
N.B.
Bow  string    .
Thyda
Possibly      "  Tdit-da."
The  long  shoots  of  the
plant  from  which  the
bow  string  is  made.
Hence       "  a      bow-
string."
D.
Boy
Aynee,  or  Eyenee  .
Not  understood.
N.B.
Boy,  or  girl  .
Beera  .
"Bfra"  is    a  Proper
Name.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
351
English.
Andamanese.
Remarks.
D.
Breast
Kam    .
Kdm-(La.
D. D.
Bring  .
Bury  —  to  bury  the dead
Lay-ao Boke    .
Evidently    an     Urdu word.
c.
N.B.
Canoe  .
Hobah
Possibly            «  tfba," "Yes."
D.
Chest  or  breast
Kam     .
-STawda.
D.
Clearing,  and  cul- tivation
Putta-ma
Er-V^tama-lH*.
D.
Cloth    .
Ooloo   .
Fo'Zo-da.
D. N.B.
Cocoa-nut
Juddur          .         . Judee,  or  Cheedee  .
(Jeder-fa.
D.
Come,  sit  down
Aka-doo-a
Ika-eW*.
D.
Come  along  (or  go)
Roonga-rooloo
D6-ng'dr-aulo,  "  I  am folio  wing  you."
D.
Copulate  —  to
Lach    .         .         .
iacA-ke".
D.
Cry  —  to
Chalock
Not  understood. 1
D.
Dive  —to
Joomuk
JAmM
N.B.
Drink  —  to
Meengohee    .
A  Jarawa  word,  from Lieutenant         Cole- brooke's  vocabulary.
B.
Drink  —  wilt  thou  .
Eena-veluk   .
Ina  wdlij-kS.
D.
I  will  not  drink
Eena-hwee-tay-gee
Ina-ttgi,      "  put    the water  down."  (Imp.)
352
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
English.
Andamanese.
Remarks.
E.
D.
Earth  .
Choohul
Possibly       "  Chtikul," "  a  thorn."
D.
Earth,  red     .
Kooput          .
Possibly  "  Koput,"  "  a bamboo  bucket."
D.
Earth,  prepared  to rub  on  body
Doongee-bilat
Not  understood.     Pos- sibly        "  Do  ng'db~ btiak,"  "  I  will  carry you  away."
N.B.
Eat—  to
Lay
JW-kd.
D.
Wilt  thou  eat
Agoo-miko    .
Not  understood. "  Aggam  "        means "  the  skin  of  a  pig."
D.
I  ate  it
Lay-ay
U-rt.
D.
Encamping  place    .
Boor     .
"  Bud  "  is  "  a  house.  " "Bdrdij,  "  a  village."
D.
Eye      .
Dul      .
i-dal-da.
P.
D.
Fire     .
Chaplay-dul            .
Chdpa-l'i-ddl-da.
N.B.
Fire     .
Choppa
Chdpa  "  firewood."
D.
Fish     .
At  (also  Meen)
7dt-d&  is  "  Fish." Ming~da    means      "  a thing."
N.B.
Fish     .
Dar-joo,  door-joo    .
Not  understood.     Pos- sibly    "  'Ar./^-k^," "to  cook."
N.B.
Flesh    .
Roge    .
Bogo-fa,  "  a  sOw."
WITH  THE  ANDAMANE8E.
353
English.
Andamauese.
Remarks.
D.
Fly—  a
Boomla
Eiimila-dtk.
N.B.
5>                                     •                      •
Boomee
n
D.
Foot  —  the
Pug      .
Pag  -da.
N.B.
Fowl  (domestic)     .
Deer    .
Dja-da,  meanin^ "mine."
G.
D.
Girdle     (the    rope work  of  the  Anda- manese).
Boodh
JBod-da.
N.B.
Give  —  to
De-walay,  or  welay. Mio-dewalay.  — Friend,  give  me.
Possibly  «  Do'-welij- ke,"  "I  want  to drink."  Mala,  means "  Sir."
N.B.
Give  water    .
Pano-de-walay
Possibly  Pano  (Urdu) for   "  water."      D6 welij-'kb  "  as  above.
D.
Go       ...
Roonga-rooloo
Do  rtg'dr-dulo,  "I  am following  you."
D.
Gun  —  a
Pugray,  also  Phoo- gree  .
Pugari-k6,  "  to  ex- plode," so,  "to  fire" off  a  gun.
H-
D.
Hair  —  the—  of    the head  .
Jyre     .
Probably  "Jer-ke*," "  to  shave  the  hair  " is  meant.
D.
Hand
Ituth    .
Obviously  Urdu.
2  z
354
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
English.
Andamanese.
Remarks.
D.
Head  —  my      head- aches
Boongee
"  Bongi-fla,  "       means fever.
D.
Honey
Awagee
Ajct-(ia.
D.
Hot—  it  is
Ugoo.    Mawa
£7y«-da.
D.
Hungry  —  is,  or  am
Joodo-ya-huda
Probably    meant     for Jodo-len  ydba-d.a, "  stomach-in-noth-
D.
Hurt  —  he,  she,  or  it, is,  or  hit
Kop
ing." K6p-k&  —  to  cut.
D.
House
Boorj    .         .         .
Bdrdij-dsi,  a  village.
J.
D.
Jack  fruit     .
Keetha
Kaleta-fa.
K-
D.
Killed—  I  killed  or strck
Tij        .
Talj-\&,  "  to  shoot."
P.
Knife,  (or  sword)  .
Koonoo          ,
KduHo-da,.
L.
D.
Lie-down
Ma-mee        ,
3ldmi-k6,  "  to  sleep."
M.
D.
Man     .         .         ,
Chow-eeka    .
Not  understood.
D.
Many  —  How  many attacked,  or  were killed.
Yay-chee-buda
Mfchiba-da,  "  What  ?" may  be  meant.
WITH  THE  ANDAMXNESE.
355
English.
Andamanese.
Remarks.
D.
N.B. N.B.
N.B.
D.
D.
D.
D.
H.
D.
Many — So      many attacked,  etc.
Moon  or  Sun Music  .
Needle — Arrowhead or  any  bit  of  iron
Nose.
Not — it  is  not,  or  is wanting
Necklace
Natural  calls,  to answer  .  .
Not — it  is  not  good, or,  I  do  not  like it,  or  want  it.
Kay-chee-kanay-dul
Chuka-la-ree-oo Chura-ka-leroo
Dentregnah  .
N.
Tolbot  or  tolbut Lanta  .
Ya-wura     (or  Yo- wura)
Purayta        .         ,
J£ichikan-d.a,,  "  so
many."
Chtt6ko'l£ro,t\nQ  ':moon in  the  first  quarter."
Not  understood.
ia,  means
"  hooked  "  and  is applied  abusively  to a  man's  nose.
Pdrita-da,,  a  necklace composed  of  pieces  of a  human  rib,  from Panto-da,  "  a  rib."
Archay-ta     • N.iching-bada
(He  has—).
Possibly "  What  ?  "
o.
Ocean
Tara
"  Tarn-da,"  "  the  sand on  the  shore."
350
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
English.
Andatnanese.
Remarks.
D.
D. D. D.
D. D.
KB.
D.
D.
D. D.
D.
H.
Pain — I  have  a pain  in  the  stom- ach.
Pain — in  the  head Paddle — to    . Path — a  .
Pig — a
Pit,  or  hollow  con- taining water
Plantains
Rain — to       . Red  earth
I
Road  or  path Run — to
Run  together — to  .
P.
Jooz-lajam    .
Boon  gee Tapa    . Teeka  .
Reg Bat-kala
Changrah,  or  Kang- ray,  or  Kangerah
B,
Oo-ma
Kooput
Teeka  . Kachuk
Muchay  kachuk     .
J6do-Vi-cMm,      «  Sto- •  mach  ache."
Bongi-da,  "Fever,"
Run  (Imp.)
Kah
Tinga-da,  "a  path," "  Teka-da,  "  means "crooked."
Meg-da,  "  a  hoar."
Possibly  "  Batba-da, "  the  osprey,"  also "  a  crow."
J&ng  era-da.
Ttim-da.,  means
"  rain."
J£oput-da,  means  "  a bamboo  bucket."
Tinga-da.
Edich-ik,  "  Come here."  (Imp.)
Moiclio  kdlch"ik,  is perhaps,  meant,  but is  bad  grammar. "  Kdich>  molcho  ik" is  what  would  be said.
Kdj !  "run  quickly."
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
357
English.
Andamanese.
Remarks.
s.
D.
Screw-pine.      Pan- danus     Odoratis-
Mang  .
Mang-da.
simus.
D.
Sea  or  Ocean.
Tara     .         .
"  Tarn-da  "    is    "  the sand  on  the  shore."
D.
See—  to
Tut-badee      .
Teg-bddiff-M.
D.
Shampoo  —  to
Pa-hee-ka
Not  understood.
N.B.
Shell—  a
Ortamboo
Not  understood.
D.
Ship  —  a
Chullood,  also  chay- layrna
Chelewa-da.
D.
Sit  —  to.    Come,  sit down
Aha-doo-ee   .
Aka-cWj.     (Imp.)
H.
Snake  —  a
Wanga
"JPdngct-da,"  a  species of  fresh-water  snake.
D.
Stand—  up    .
Kapee           .         .
Kdpi.     (Imp.)
D.
Stones  —  I  will  trow stones
Py-dul-ee
"  Pdldli-'kG,  "to  throw stones."
N.B.
String  —  rope  of  any sort    .
Thyda  .
Possibly      "  Tail-da," the    long    shoots    of the  plant  from  which the  bow-strings    are made.     Hence      "  a bow-string."
D.
Swim  —  to
Feet     .
P#-ke-.
D.
Step  —  footstep,     or footmark    .
P.        ...
P»ra,
358
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
Fnglish.
Andamanese.
Remarks.
N.B.
Take  (off)      .
T.
Negiah,  neegyah    .
"  Na""    "give"   may be  meant.
D.
Tattoo  —  to     tattoo the  forehead
Jeyte    .
Y#*-ke.
N.B.
Tongs  .
Chy-ky
KcH-fa.
D.
Water
w.
Aneea
fna-da.
N.B.
»»               •
Pano    .         •
An        Urdu        word. "  Pani."
D.
Fresh  water
Bang   .
"Bang"    means    "a hole."   Ina-l'ig'bdng- da,"       "fresh-  water hole."
D.
I  will  make  water  .
Oloo     .
Clu-k6.
N.B,
"Whiskers
Looka
Possibly     "  irffo-da," "  Not         tattooed," Sl  hairless,"    may   be meant.
D.
"Wood  .
Chapa
Chdpa-da,.
N.B.
jj      .         .         •
Chopa           .         .
Y.
N.B.
Yam    .
Chatah,  chatay
Chdti-Aa.
N.B.
Yes
Oh  !  (Eeno  and  Ino are    "  STes  "    and
0-oh,  also  t^6«-da,  etc.
"No"   according to  one  authority, but  which   is  not
stated.)
NOTE. — The   letter  A  is  always  long  as  in  Ah  t  the  spelling  of  the  contributors  has  been  strictly adhered  to.
The  words  marked  H  were  given  by  Lieutenant  Hellard,  I.N. ;    those   marked  D  by   Dudhuatb Tewari ;  and  those  marked  N.  B.  by  the  men  of  the  Naval  Brigade.
WITH  THE  AXD.UIAXESE.  3.7,
CHAPTER     X.
Murder  of  Pratt  by  the  Andamaneso—  Colonel  Tytler  proposes  severe  measures— Letter from  tho  Government  of  India— Tho  murderers  of  Pratt  are  arrested — Wallace's statement — The  Andamaneso  become  more  friendly,  and  are  all  owed  to  «ee  the captives — Truth  about  the  murder  of  Pratt  disclosed — Colonel  Tytler's  letters — Displeasure  of  the  Government  of  India — Release  of  the  captives — Convicts  assisted in  escaping  by  Malays — The  country  between  Port  Blair  and  Port  Monat  explored — Mr.  Corbyn  in  charge  of  the  Andamaneso — Colonel  Tytlor  leaves  the  Settlement, and  is  succeeded  by  Major  Fold — Colonel  Tytler's  letter  to  the  Government — Colonel  Tytl«r's  letter  to  Mr.  Corbyn — Narrative  of  Mr.  Corbyn — Rupees  100  per mensem  allowed  by  the  Government  for  the  Andaman  Homes.
DURING  the  remainder  of  1862  we  hear  nothing  of  the  Andaman- ese, and  as  they  seem  to  have  ceased  attacking  the  Settlement  and murdering  any  convicts  they  met  with,  Colonel  Tytler  supposed  that friendly  intercourse  with  them  had  been  established.  He  used  to send  small  parties  of  the  Naval  Brigadesmen  to  their  encampments, between  whom,  and  the  Andamanese,  some  sort  of  friendly  intimacy seems  to  have  sprung  up.
From  the  Andamanese  themselves  I  learn  that  such  was  the  case, as,  after  the  return  of  the  two  men  from  Moulmein,  their  account  of us,  and  of  our  ways,  influenced  their  tribesmen  so  much  that  they were  ready  to  accept  in  a  similar  spirit  any  friendly  overtures  whicli might  be  made  to  them.
It  should  of  course  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  story  of  the  Moul- mein captives  only  influenced,  (and  that  slowly),  one  Sept  of  the  Aka- Ite'rt-da  tribe,  and  a  considerable  time  would  have  to  elapse  before  the Andamanese  of  the  whole  tribe  were  convinced  of  our  friendly  dis- position.
Unfortunately,  just  as  the  friendly  relations  were  beginning,  the disgraceful  conduct  of  a  Naval  Brigadesman,  named  Pratt,  brought on  a  quarrel  resulting  in  a  further  enmity  on  both  sides,  which  pro- longed the  period  of  hostility.
360  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
On  the  28th  January,  1863,  Petty  Officer  Smith  of  the  Naval  Bri- gade reported  to  Colonel  Tytler  that  he,  with  a  boat  full  of  Naval Brigadesmen,  among  whom  were  four  men  named  Pratt,  John Hamilton,  H.  W.  Brown,  and  John  Watson,  Lad  gone  by  Colonel Ty tier's  order  to  establish  friendly  relations  with  the  aborigines,  to the  Andamanese  camp  at  North  Point  on  the  afternoon  of  that  day and  had  landed  there.  The  party  were  received  by  about  30  Anda- manese of  both  sexes,  who  crowded  round  them  and  appeared  to  be quite  friendly.  Suddenly  the  Andamanese  seized  Pratt,  held  him down,  and  shot  him  to  death  with  their  arrows,  on  seeing  which  the other  Europeans  fired  indiscriminately  into  the  mass  of  savages,  and then  got  into  their  boat  and  returned  to  the  Settlement.
Colonel  Tytler  appears  to  have  accepted  this  report  as  correct without  any  further  enquiry,  beyond  recording  the  statements  of the  other  three  men  mentioned  above,  and  wrote  to  the  Government of  India  recommending  that  great  severity  should  now  be  shown  to- wards the  Andamanese  in  return  for  their  cold-blooded  act  of  treach- ery, advising  that  the  convicts  should  be  armed  with  muskets  to protect  themselves,  and  suggesting  that  a  general  hunt  after  the aborigines  should  be  made  with  a  view  to  catching  and  transporting them  to  some  other  island.
As  if  to  strengthen  Colonel  Tytler's  argument,  but  really  as  a result  of  the  treatment  they  had  received  at  North  Point,  some  of  the Andamanese  attacked  Haddo  Station  on  the  6th  February,  wounded a  convict  sepoy,  and  carried  off  several  cooking  pots  from  one  of  the houses.  On  the  same  day  also  a  convict  while  working  at  Aberdeen was  suddenly  seized  by  several  Andamanese,  two  of  whom  held  his hands  while  a  third  cut  him  on  the  neck,  shoulders,  back,  arms,  and thighs  with  a  knife.  The  Andamanese  then  made  their  escape. Colonel  Tytler,  when  reporting  this  occurrence  to  the  Government, remarks  that,  if  this  goes  on,  Aberdeen  and  Haddo  will  have  to  be abandoned,  as  the  convicts  will  not  remain  there.  He  pointed  out also  that  he  had  only  £0  armed  convict  police,  scattered  about ; eleven  being  at  Aberdeen,  fifteen  at  Haddo,  twelve  at  Viper,  and twelve  at  Chatham  ;  and  added  that  they  were  not  of  much  use,
WITH  TEE  ANDAMANESE.
361
and  that  two  companies  of  sepoys  were  required.  He  characterised the  Andamanese  as  u  a  race  of  treacherous  cold-bloo.lod  murderers, assuming  the  garb  of  friendship  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  out their  diabolical  plans."
(As  will  be  seen  presently,  the  Andamanese  might  at  that  time have  applied  the  above  epithets  with  more  justice  to  Colonol  Tytler's Naval  Guard.— M.  V.  P.)
He  made  every  endeavour  to  catch  the  murderers  of  Pratt,  who are  described  as  being  "  Jumbo"  and "  Snowball."  (Their Andamanese  names  were  Jumbo-Tura,  Snowball-Lokala.)  From  the fact  of  their  being  identified  by  the  Naval  Brigade,  and  being  known to  them  by  these  names,  it  would  appear  that  at  this  time  there  was some  considerable  intimacy  between  these  men  and  the  Andamanese.
The  Government  of  India  in  commenting  on  the  above,  after summing  up  the  facts  in  Colonel  Tytler's  report,  state,  in  Home  De- partment letter  No.  1653  of  the  llth  March,  1863  :—
"  2.  The  Hon'ble  the  President  in  Council  has  received  the  intelli- gence you  communicate  with  much  regret.
"  3.  You  were  no  doubt  actuated  by  the  best  of  motives  in  your earlier  policy  towards  the  aborigines,  and  your  praiseworthy  efforts to  open  a  friendly  intercourse  with  them  appear  open  to  no  other objection  than  that  your  men  went  out  in  too  small  pxrties,  so  that  oa the  first  occasion  of  difficulty  they  had  not  the  means  of  acting  with propriety.
"  If,  when  the  unfortunate  seaman  was  shot,  two  or  three  of  the natives  had  been  instantly  seized  as  hostages,  instead  of  an  indis. criminate  fire  being  begun  upon  a  party  of  savages  among  whom women  were  present,  the  interests  of  humanity  and  civilisation would  have  been  better  consulted.  The  Hon'ble  the  President  in Council  is,  however,  prepared  to.  make  allowance  for  the  action  of men  placed  in  sudden  difficulty  without  anyone  of  superior  intelli- gence to  control  them.
"  4.  It  seems  clear  that  you  expected  too  much  from  your  first apparent  success  in  establishing  friendly  relations  with  the  Andaman- ese and  you  are  consequently,  His  Honor  in  Council  believes,  unduly
3   A
302  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
disappointed  by  the  unfortunate  occurrences  which  succeeded.  The same  series  of  events  has  presented  itself  over  and  oyer  again  with the  Australian  aborigines,  the  friendly  intercourse,  excessive  con- fidence  on  the  part  of  the  European,  then  unexplained  treachery from  the  natives.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  the  kindly  dis- position first  shown  was  assumed  or  affected,  but  with  races  of  such low  organisation  there  is  never  any  security  against  sudden  outbreaks of  rage  or  cupidity  in  individuals.  The  over-confidence  first  felt  by the  Englishmen,  though  natural!  was  a  mistake,  but  the  severity  you recommend  would  be  a  still  greater  mistake.  The  Hon'ble  the President  in  Council  desires  you  to  dismiss  all  idea  of  a  general  hunt after  the  aborigines,  in  view  to  transporting  them  to  a  separate island.
"5.  Nor  can  His  Honor  in  Council  allow  you  to  arm  any  more convicts  ;  these  men,  as  a  class,  are  quite  capable  of  exaggerating the  fear  inspired  in  them  by  the  natives,  expressly  in  order  to  have arms  entrusted  to  them.
"6.  A  request  will  this  day  be  addressed,  through  the  Military Department,  to  the  Government  of  Madras,  for  two  Companies,  one of  Sappers  and  one  of  Native  Infantry,  to  be  at  once  despatched  to Port  Blair.  You  will  proceed,  on  receipt  of  this  letter,  to  take immediate  steps  for  providing  them  with  accommodation,  and  with the  assistance  thus  afforded  you,  the  President  in  Council  expects that  you  will  be  able  to  afford  efficient  protection  to  your  posts  and working  parties,  and  to  expedite  the  work  of  clearing  away  the jungle  about  your  Settlement.  Within  the  range  of  these  measures you  are  desired  to  confine  yourself,  and  it  is  anticipated  that  they will  not  only  suffice  to  free  you  from  annoyance,  but  that  the savages,  finding  themselves  unmolested  by  aggressive  reprisals  on the  one  hand,  and  at  the  same  time  debarred  from  those  European articles  of  food  and  convenience,  the  pleasures  of  which  they have  tasted,  may  endeavour  to  regain  our  favour  by  improved  con- duct."
In  February,  1863,  Colonel  Tytler,  who  had  been  watching  for the  two  Andamanese  who  murdered  Pratt,  managed  to  arrest  them
WITH  THE  ANDAMANE8E.
in  the  following  manner.  The  Chinese  birds'  nest  contractor,  who was  trying  to  get  out  to  the  Archipelago,  was  obliged  by  adverse winds,  and  calms  to  anchor  at  North  Point,  at  the  very  place  where the  Naval  Brigade  launch  used  to  lay  when  the  men  were  trying  to make  friends  with  the  Atidamauese  there.  The  Andamanese  swam off  to  the  boat,  pretending  to  be  friendly,  and  dancing,  in  a  treacher- ous manner,  at  the  same  time  stealing  all  that  they  could  get  hold  of. Notice  of  this  was  given  to  Colonel  Tytler,  and  he  sent  a  canoe with  one  of  his  office  writers,  named  Paul,  disguised  as  a  Burmese, to  secure  "  Snowball"  and  "  Jumbo,"  and  at  the  same  time  to  give the  other  Andamanese  presents  of  plantains  and  coconuts,  to  keep them  quiet  and  friendly.
Paul  went  over,  and  the  same  evening  two  Andamanese  swam off  to  the  boats.  One,  called  "  King  John,"  looked  suspiciously  at the  new  comers,  as  well  as  at  the  presents,  and  saying  something  to the  other  went  back  to  the  shore  and  did  not  return.  After  waiting a  day  or  two  the  boats  returned  to  Ross  for  a  few  days.  The  Chinese then  sailed  out  to  sea  for  some  miles  and  returned  and  anchored  again off  North  Point.  About  30  of  the  Andamanese,  both  men  and women,  then  swam  off  to  the  vessel,  Snowball  and  Jumbo  being among  them.  Food  and  presents  were  given  them  and  the  anchor weighed,  on  seeing  which  the  women  and  most  of  the  men  jumped overboard,  and  swam  on  shore,  but  the  boat  sailed  into  Boss  with Jumbo,  Snowball,  and  nine  other  men.  The  Naval  Brigade  men,  who had  accompanied  Smith  over  to  North  Point,  then  went  through  the murder  in  pantomime,  in  order  to  show  the  Andamanese  the  reason for  their  capture;  presents  were  given  to  the  nine  Andamanese,  and they  were  taken  back  to  North.  Point  and  landed  there.  Snowball an  d  Jumbo  were  detained  as  prisoners.
Colonel  Tytler  stated  that  he  intended  to  forward  these  two Andamanese  to  Calcutta  by  the  earliest  opportunity,  for  detention there,  as  he  wished  to  banish  them  entirely  from,  their  own  country.
The  Government  of  India  approved  of  his  proceedings  and  issued orders  to  the  Government  of  Bengal  for  the  reception  and  treatment of  the  Andamanese.  They  were  to  be  kept  in  the  Alipur  Jail,  and
»A  3
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
special  care  was  to  be  taken  that  their  health  was  not  to  be  in  nny way  injured.  Their  language  was  to  be  examined  by  some  trained linguist,  and  they  were  not  to  be  treated  with  any  severity.
On  the  6th  April,  1863,  the  Andamanese  not  having  then  arrived in  Calcutta,  the  Government  of  India  modified  their  order,  and directed  that  they  were  to  be  sent  to  Moulmein  for  confinement  in the  jail  there,  as  the  climate  of  Burmah  would  be  less  likely  to prove  injurious  to  them  than  that  of  Calcutta.
In  March,  1863,  some  feeble  attempts  were  made  to  establish friendly  relations  with  the  Andamanese  to  the  North  of  the  harbour, but  without  success,  the  savages  keeping  in  the  jungle  and  being afraid  to  show  themselves  or  take  the  presents  offered.
At  this  time  a  Naval  Brigadesman,  named  George  "Wallace,  made a  statement  to  Colonel  Tytler  that,  about  ten  years  before,  a  man named  Knott  had  been  living  on  the  Andaman  Islands  with  the aborigines,  and  was  well  acquainted  with  their  language  and  customs. No  action  seems  to  have  been  taken  on  the  report,  which  was  probably incorrect.
On  the  31st  March,  1863,  Colonel  Tytler  observed  two  canoes full  of  Andamanese  hovering  about  North  Point  in  a  curious  manner, as  if  wishing  for  friendship.  He  sent  Naval  Brigadesman  Hamilton with  a  well  armed  boat's  crew,  and  orders  to  give  the  Andamanese presents  and  be  very  cautious  and  friendly.  Hamilton  brought  back two  men  who  had  boarded  the  boat  of  their  own  accord,  and  they were  taken  to  see  Snowball  and  Jumbo  in  their  fetters.  After  speak- ing a  few  words  at  a  distance  they  had  the  usual  cry  of  greeting, which  Colonel  Tytler  seems  to  have  noticed  for  the  first  time,  and not  understanding  it,  thought  to  be  something  very  much  out  of the  common.  Snowball,  who  acted  witli  dignity,  he  thought  to  be probably  a  Chief.  The  new  comers  were  given  a  quantity  of  coconuts and  plantains,  and  were  landed  on  North  Point  the  following  morn- ing. They  begged  hard  that  the  fetters  might  be  removed  from Snowball  and  Jumbo,  and  that  they  might  be  released,  but  this  was not  permitted.
WITH  TH  E  ANDAMANESE.  365
Hamilton's  statement  regarding  his  interview    with  the   Anda- manese  is : —
"The  Andamanese  hailed  us  from  the  shore.  Two  or  three swam  off  and  wanted  us  to  go  on  shore  with  them.  We  would  not, and  anchored  the  hoat.  I  told  them  to  bring  bows  and  arrows,  and we  would  give  them  presents.  I  asked  for  women.  They  said they  were  in  camp  and  asked  us  to  go  there.  They  call  a  woman "Beera".  (This  was  of  course  the  name  of  some  particular  Anda- manese woman. — M.  V.  P.)
"  We  would  not  go  to  their  camp,  and  they  then  said  that  two  or three  would  go  to  Ross,  and  the  rest  would  bring  women  and  people to  meet  us  on  our  return.  The  conversation  was  by  signs.  I  said that  the  two  men  I  took  away  would  not  return  that  night,  and  they seemed  pleased.  They  shouted  for  Raggo  (food),  (R6go  "  pig")i  and wanted  to  see  Snowball.  I  think  one  of  the  men  we  brought  over is  Snowball's  brother.  There  were  about  thirty  Andamanese.  The rest  were  away  hunting.  They  had  two  large  canoes.  It  is  the same  party  we  used  to  see  at  North  Point,  and  lately  to  the  south- ward, before."
The  action  of  Colonel  Tytler  in  allowing  these  two  men  to  see the  prisoners  was  very  judicious,  for  the  other  Andamanese  thus learnt  that  they  were  only  in  captivity,  and  had  not  been  killerl, and  a  great  impression  seems  to  have  been  made  upon  the  tribe generally.
Hamiltonjs  statement  shows  only  too  clearly  how  little  the Naval  Brigade  could  be  relied  upon  as  peacemakers  with  the Andamanese.  He  first  calls  for  bows  and  arrows,  which  according to  Andamanese  etiquette  should  never  have  been  asked  for,  and  to produce  which  before  strangers  was  a  sign  of  hostility,  and  he  then asks  for  women.
This  latter  request,  coupled  with  the  subsequent  disclosures regarding  the  murder  of  Pratt,  throws  a  great  deal  of  light  on  the interviews  between  the  Naval  Brigadesmen  and  the  Andamanesp,  and gives  a  good  reason  for  the  latter's  continued  hostility  to  us,  and  their refusal  to  accept  the  friendly  overtures  of  others.
366  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
On  the  27th  April,  1863,  Colonel  Tytler,  in  a  letter  to  the Government  of  India,  suggested  that  the  two  Andamanese  prisoners who  were  then  still  in  Port  Blair,  should  be  kept  in  Calcutta  in preference  to  being  sent  to  Moulmein,  and  then  went  on  to  state, uith  reference  to  his  former  reports  relative  to  the  murder  of Pratt  :—
"  I  thought  it  advisable  in  consequence  of  reports  that  have lately  reached  me,  to  take  further  statements  which  contain  inform- ation which  I  was  formerly  in  ignorance  of.  The  four  statements now  submitted  were  taken  from  the  three  men  who  were  present when  Pratt  was  shot  at  North  Point,  and  from  the  gunner  of  the Brigade  (for  I  was  anxious  to  know  the  general  opinion  of  the  men in  barracks,  relative  to  the  cause  of  this  unaccountable  and  ap- parently cold-blooded  murder) .,  and  although  the  statements  in  them- selves are  conflicting  and  contradictory,  and  materially  differ  from those  taken  before,  and  submitted  to  you,  they  show  beyond  all doubt  that  "  Jumbo"  shot  Pratt,  and  that  the  Chief  "  Snowball" was  present ;  but  at  the  same  time  a  cause  for  the  act  is  now  given (that  Pratt  tried  to  rape  an  Andamanese  woman  in  the  encampment soon  after  he  landed — M.  V.  P.)  which  certainly  none  of  the other  statements  alluded  to,  and  which  materially  alters  the  features of  the  tragedy,  and  places  the  conduct  of  the  savages  in  a  different light  to  that  formerly  shown.  I  would,  therefore,  recommend  that after  they  have  been  a  sufficient  time  in  Calcutta,  and  imparted  any information  we  might  acquire  from  them  (their  treatment  being  a series  of  kindness),  that  they  be  returned  with  a  supply  of  suitable presents,  to  their  native  land,  and  liberated.
"  In  conclusion,  I  beg  to  state  that  I  will  send  them  to  Calcutta by  the  first  direct  steamer  from  this  port."
Colonel  Tytler  again  addressed  the  Government   of   India  on  the 6th  May,  as  follows  : —
He  begs  that,  should  the  proposals  in  his  former  letter  be  not  ac- ceded to,  the  Andamanese  prisoners  be  allowed  to  remain  in  Port Blair  in  preference  to  being  sent  to  Moulmein.  "  There  is  no  doubt that  their  retention  here  has  been  productive  of  good  results,  for  the
WITH  THE  AXDAMANESE.
aborigines,  ever  since  We  have  bad  tbese  two  men  in  custody,  have  be- haved themselves  in  a  most  unusually  inoffensive  manner,  particularly since  the  two  aborigines  came  over  here  and  saw  them.
"  Both  Snowball  and  Jumbo  keep  in  good  health  and  spirits.  I have  had  them  taught  basket-making,  which  they  now  make  remark- ably well,  and  the  baskets  when  finished  I  take  from  them  by  ex- changing a  coconut  for  a  basket.  In  this  dealing  they  show  an amount  of  natural  honesty  :  for  example,  on  one  occasion,  I  took  four coconuts  intending  to  give  them  for  baskets,  but  seeing  none  near  the prisoners  as  usual,  and  rather  than  disappoint  them,  I  gave  them  the coconuts,  when  to  my  surprise  Jumbo  got  up,  and  went  to  another place  where  he  was  evidently  keeping  his  baskets,  and  gave  me  five ; I  at  once  returned  one  and  kept  four,  and  this  seemed  to  please  them much.  I  think,  if  Government  would  permit  me  to  send  these  two men  to  Calcutta,  not  merely  as  prisoners,  but  to  see  the  comfort  of  a large  city,  our  power,  and  a  civilised  world,  and  then  return  them  to their  own  country,  the  effect  would  be  great  and  certainly  prove  be« neficial  to  our  position  here."
After  a  consideration  of  the  above,  the  following  answer  from  the Government  of  India  to  Colonal  Tytler  will  not  appear  surprising.
In  letter  No.  4013,  from  the  Home  Department,  dated  19th  June, 1863,  the  Government  of  India,  after  summing  up  the  information given  in  Colonel  Tytler's  reports  on  the  Pratt  murder  case,  go  on  to say  ; —
«'  The  President  in  Council  has  observed  with  much  regret  the  very unfavourable  light  which  the  information  now  submitted  throws upon  the  conduct  of  the  boat's  crew  sent  out  on  the  7th  January  to establish  a  friendly  intercourse  with  the  aborigines.  Nor  can  His Honor  in  Council  consider  it  by  any  means  creditable  to  your  admin- istration of  the  Settlement,  that,  owing  to  the  imperfect  manner  in which,  on  the  occurrence  of  the  murder,  the  attendant  circumstances were  investigated  by  you,  the  Government  of  India  is  only  now  be- ginning to  obtain  materials  for  a  correct  appreciation  of  the  origin  of the  catastrophe.  Your  former  communications  of  February  last were  so  framed  as  to  convey  to  Government  the  impression  that  no
338  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
explanation  of  the  attack  could  be  given  other  than  the  faithlessness and  impulsiveness  of  savage  nature,  and  that,  in  your  opinion,  sum- mary and  exemplary  vengeance  ought  to  be  taken.
"  3.  Your  misapprehension  of  the  case  has  led  to  the  imprisonment for  a  considerable  time  of  a  man  (Snowball),  who,  as  it  now  appears, had  committed  no  crime,  but  on  the  contrary  had  shown  a  consist- ently friendly  disposition  towards  the  Settlement.  The  President  in Council  directs  that  he  be  at  once  dismissed  with  some  small  pre- sents, the  reason  for  this  change  being  explained  to  him  as  well  as  he can  be  made  to  understand  it.
"  4.  The  other  should  undergo  a  further  detention  at  Port  Blair of  seven  months  from  the  date  of  this  letter,  in  order  that  he  may  be impressed  with  a  sense  of  his  deed  being  no  trivial  matter,  and  that the  islanders  generally  may  be  brought  to  associate  a  clear  notion  of consequent  punishment  with  the  infliction  of  any  injury  to  any  per- son belonging  to  the  Settlement.  During  his  detention  this  man should  be  taught  as  many  useful  things  as  possible  ;  and,  if  his  health fail,  you  are  authorised  to  abridge  the  term  of  his  imprisonment.
"  5,  The  President  in  Council  is  unable  to  agree  with  you  in  your view  of  the  advantages  derivable  from  the  despatch  of  savages  like those  on  the  Andaman  Islands,  for  a  temporary  residence  in  a  great city,  far  from  their  home  across  the  sea.  Such  a  measure,  His  Honor in  Council  believes,  would  ba  full  of  suffering  to  those  on  whom  the experiment  might  be  tried  ;  and  in  the  present  instance  it  clearly could  not  be  justified  as  a  punishment."
On  Colonel  Tytier  making  some  further  references  to  the  Govern- ment in  justification  of  his  conduct,  he  again  drew  upon  himself their  severe  displeasure,  in  letter  No.  4847  of  the  4th  August,  1863- in  which  the  following  remark,  which  most  accurately  describes  the habits  of  the  Andamanese,  occurs  : —
"  You  at  once  readily  adopted  the  account  which  Petty  Officer Smith  palmed  off  upon  you,  though  there  were  statements  in  that  ac- count which  ought  of  themselves  to  have  excited  suspicion,  showing as  they  did  almost  certainly  that  the  attack  upon  Pratt  was  the  result of  some  sudden  anger,  and  that  it  was  entirely  unexpected  by  tho
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
aborigines  on  the  shore,  some  thirty  of  whom  were  close  to  Smith  at the  time,  and  never  attempted  to  touch  him,"
The  only  possible  good  that  the  whole  affair  can  have  had  was, that  it  overawed  the  Andamanese,  showing  them  that  we  wore  the masters,  and  they  the  subject  race,  and  that,  whatever  we  might  do to  them,  any  unfriendly  action  on  their  part  would  lead  to  speedy  and severe  punishment.  In  this  manner,  and  by  our  contact  with  them throughout  the  affair,  they  possibly  obtained  a  knowledge  of  us  which smoothed  the  way  for  friendly  relations  afterwards.
As  the  remainder  of  Colonel  Tytler's  action  in  this  case  is  related in  the  Narrative  of  the  Revd.  Henry  Corbyn,  and  in  Colonel Tytler's  letter  forwarding  that  Narrative  (given  in  full  later  on),  I will  only  quote  hero  the  circumstances  connected  with  the  Andaman- ese which  are  not  published  in  those  papers.  It  is  sufficient  to  say that  Snowball  was  sent  back  to  his  tribe,  with  presents,  on  the  5th July,  1863,  immediately  on  the  receipt  of  the  order  of  the  Govern- ment of  India,  and  that  Jumbo,  on  Mr.  Corbyn's  representation  that he  had  been  without  fetters  for  a  long  time,  and  had  behaved  very well,  not  attempting  to  escape,  though  urged  to  do  so  by  the  other  An- damanese, was  also  returned  to  his  home  on  the  12th  October,  1863. This  action,  though  not  exactly  in  accordance  with  the  orders  of  the Government  of  India,  was  noted  by  them  without  comment.
On  the  morning  of  the  17th  May,  1863,  two  Cattoos  manned  by armed  Malays  arrived  at  the  mouth  of  the  Tavoy  river,  having  con- cealed on  board  of  them  thirteen  escaped  convicts  from  the  Anda- mans.  This  information  having  been  communicated  to  the  police there,  an  armed  party  in  two  boats  went  on  board  the  vessels,  the  crew of  which  were  inclined  to  offer  resistance  until  they  saw  that  the  party of  police  was  too  strong  for  them,  when  they  surrendered.  It had  been  the  intention  of  the  masters  of  the  Cattoos  to  make  the  coast much  further  to  the  southward,  and  to  have  landed  the  convicts  there and  help  them  across  into  Siamese  territory,  but  the  bad  weather drove  them  up  to  Tavoy  Point,  on  nearing  the  shore  of  which  four Burmese,  who  formed  a  portion  of  the  crew,  jumped  overboard,  swam ashore,  and  gave  the  information.
81
370  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
These  two  Cattoos  belonged  to  the  Chinaman  Tset  Tsoung  (an  in- habitant of  Mergui),  who  had  purchased  the  privilege  of  collecting Edible  birds'  nests  and  Trepan g  at  the  Andamans,  from  the  Superin- tendent of  Port  Blair,  and  who,  though  on  former  occasions  he  had complained  against  other  vessels,  seems  to  have  been  little  better  than a  pirate  himself.
The  convicts,  (ten  natives  of  India,  and  three  Malays),  had  escaped 'from  Chatham  Island  on  the  26th  April,  1863,  and  were  picked  up  at the  mouth  of  some  creek  (probably  otE  Kyd  Island)  in  an  English boat  they  had  stolen.  The  three  Malays  persuaded  the  master  of  one of  the  Cattoos,  named  Tseil  Soorin,  to  take  them  away,  and  after  re- maining three  days  off  the  creek  the  boat  with  the  convicts  was  taken in  tow.
Bad  weather  coming  on  after  they  had  put  to  sea,  the  convicts were  taken  on  board  the  Cattoos  and  the  boat  was  scuttled.  The Malay  crews  of  the  Cattoos  denied  all  this,  which  was  obtained  part- ly from  the  four  Burmese  above-mentioned,  and  partly  from  the  ad- missions of  the  convicts  themselves,  and  pretended  that  they  had  picked up  the  convicts  at  sea,  and  had  tried  to  take  them  back  to  the Andamans,  but  were  prevented  from  doing  so  by  the  unfavourable weather.  The  convicts  admitted  that  the  Malays  were  paid  three hundred  rupees  for  aiding  them  to  escape,  while  the  Burmese  wit- nesses further  charged  the  Malays  with  a  conspiracy  to  murder  all  the convicts  on  an  island  in  the  Mergui  Archipelago,  and  take  possession of  their  property.
The  Malays  and  the  convicts  were  forwarded  to  the  Superintendent of  Port  Blair  for  trial,  and  Colonel  Tytler  sentenced  the  Master  of  the Cattoo,  Tseil  Soorin,  to  ten  years'  penal  servitude,  he  being  the  ring- leader, and  the  remainder  of  the  crews  to  seven  years'  penal  servitude each.
Another  Cattoo  put  in  at  Ye  about  this  time  with  birds'  nests  from the  Andamans,  and  the  Commissioner  of  Tenasserim  drew  attention to  the  fact  that  all  these  Cattoos  were  very  strongly  armed,  and  ex- pressed a  suspicion  that,  when  business  was  slack  at  the  Andamans, tney  possibly  engaged  in  piracy  on  the  numerous  junks  passing  up
WITH  TUB  ANDAMANESE.  371
and  down  the  coast,  many  of  which   were  said  to  have  been  lost  and never  heard  of.
In  consequence  of  this,  he  disarmed  the  Malay  Colony  at  the mouth  of  the  Tavoy  river,  and  found  that  every  man  there  was armed  with  muskets,  Krises,  or  Malay  swords  (Parangs) ;  and  he also  ordered  a  strict  watch  to  be  kept  on  all  the  Malay  villages scattered  along  the  coast.
A  number  of  Malay  and  Burmese  craft  seem  to  have  been lurking  about  the  Andamans  at  this  time  and  for  some  years  later, and  the  days  of  the  kidnapping  of  the  Andamanese  for  slaves,  and their  hostile  encounters  with  the  crews  of  vessels  had  not  entirely passed  away.
It  was  not  considered  necessary  on  this  account,  however,  to stop  the  collection  of  Edible  birds'  nests  and  Trepang,  and  in  a further  contract  "  shells"  are  mentioned,  which  may  mean  either tortoise-shell,  of  which  a  considerable  quantity  was  to  be  procured  at the  Andamans,  or  pearl  oyster  shells,  which  were  known  to  exist there.
On  the  8th  February ,  1861,  Colonel  Tytler  urged  the  necessity of  having  a  small  Settlement  of,  say,  500  convicts,  under  the  charge of  Mr.  Horn  fray,  at  Port  Mouat.  It  would  prevent  escapes  to  the west  coast,  and  would  also  save  shipwrecked  people  from  being murdered  by  the  Andamanese.  He  sent  Mr.  Homfray  round  to  Port Mouat,  by  way  of  Macpherson's  Straits,  in  the  Steam  Launch Diana,  with  orders  to  leave  her  there  and  come  overland  to  Port Blair  by  compass  course.  Observations  with  regard  to  the  feasibility of  this  had  been  taken  from  the  summit  of  Mount  Harriett,  which  was cleared,  (the  hill  was  called  after  Mrs.  Tytler),  and  Mr.  Prince  was directed  to  leave  Mitha  Kbdri  (a  point  on  the  mainland  opposite Viper  Island)  on  the  same  day  that  Mr.  Homfray  left  Port  Mouat, and  to  make  for  Port  Mouat.
Mr.  Homfray  came  across  in  five  hours,  and  said  that  the distance  was  only  two  and  a  half  miles  between  what  are  now  known as  Tytler  Ghat,  and  Homfray  Ghat,  respectively.
3u2
372  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
(It  is  curious  that  Major  Haughton,  having  struck  too  far  to the  north  in  his  exploration  of  the  same  country,  and  not  finding this  neck  of  land,  questioned  the  accuracy  of  Dr.  Mouat  and  the other  mernhers  of  the  Andaman  Committee  in  their  remarks  about Port  Mouat.)
A  track  between  these  two  places  was  cleared  twenty  feet wide,  and  while  superintending  the  cutting  of  it  Mr.  Homfray  slept one  night  in  a  deserted  Andamanese  village.
The  Revd.  Henry  Corbyn,  Chaplain  of  Port  Blair,  accom- panied Mr.  Prince's  party,  and  while  they  were  in  the  jungle  they were  suddenly  surrounded  by  about  200  Andamanese,  all  armed  with powerful  bows  and  iron-headed  arrows.  They  had  first  formed  in  a semi-circle,  and  were  evidently  combined  with  a  view  to  attacking our  party,  whom  they  tried  to  entice  into  an  ambush.  Mr.  Corbyn had  the  invaluable  Andamanese  woman,  called  Topsy,  with  him,  and by  his  presence  of  mind  in  knowing  what  was  the  right  thing  to  do at  the  moment,  and  doing  it,  saved  the  party  from  assault.  Taking Topsy  by  the  hand  he  advanced  towards  the  Andamanese  man  whom  he took  to  be  the  chief,  and  who  kept  his  arrow  ready  in  his  bow,  look- ing a  picture  of  savage  hatred.  Topsy  spoke  to  him  vehemently, imploring  him  not  to  fire,  and  eventually  induced  him  to  give  his bow  and  arrow  into  Mr.  Corbyn's  hands.  The  others  seeing  this,  and hearing  what  Topsy  had  to  say,  laid  down,  hid,  or  gave  up  their weapons,  and  became  friendly.  Mr.  Corbyn  brought  back  with him  to  Ross  three  of  them,  including  the  Chief.
The  plucky  conduct  of  both  Mr.  Homfray  and  Mr.  Corbyn  on this  occasion  is  worthy  of  notice.  They  knew  that  they  ran  every chance  of  being  murdered  by  the  Andamanese,  but  were  not influenced  by  this  in  their  conduct  of  the  expedition,  nor  did  they lose  their  heads  or  fire  a  single  shot  at  the  savages.
Mr.  Homfray  had  observed  the  wreck  of  a  vessel  near  Port Mouat,  and  the  marks  of  hob-nailed  boots,  evidently  belonging  to Europeans,  some  of  which  marks  being  found  on  the  sand  below high  water  mark  led  him  to  conclude  that  some  of  the  crew  were still  alive.  Colonel  Tytler  despatched  a  further  party  under  Mr.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  373
Corbyn  to  look  for  the  castaways  from  this  wreck,  but  none  of  them were  to  be  seen.
The  Andamanese  had  probably  murdered  them  all,  and  were wearing  the  boots  themselves  for  fun,  as  I  have  known  them  do  in more  recent  wrecks.
On  the  15th  February,  186  i,  Lieutenant-Colonel  R.  C.  Tytler, who  was  still  officiating  as  Superintendent  of  Port  Blair  in  the place  of  Major  Haughfcon,  on  leave,  made  over  charge  of  that  office to  Major  Barnet  Ford,  and  proceeded  on  leave,  as  his  health  had failed  during  his  term  of  office  in  the  Andamans.
As,  during  Colonel  Tytler's  Superintendentship,  Mr.  Corbyn first  became  acquainted  with  the  Andamanese,  the  Andaman  Homes were  founded,  and  he  became  the  first  Officer  in  charge  of  them,  the first  of  his  Narratives,  with  the  accompanying  letters,  is  here  inserted.
Letter  No.  22,  dated  the  25th  June,  1863,  from  Lieutenant- Colonel  Tytler,  to  E.  C.  Bayley,  Esq  ,  Secretary  to  the  Government of  India : —
"  It  is  with  the  greatest  pleasure  I  have  now  the  honor  respect- fully to  report,  for  the  information  of  Government,  the  apparently great  success  which  has  attended  my  most  ardent  wish  and  desire, viz.)  to  establish  upon  a  safe  and  permanent  base  a  friendly  inter- course with  the  aborigines  of  these  inhospitable  islands  to  strangers. This  I  trust  has  now  to  all  appearance  bsen  fully  established  with  at least  one,  if  not  two,  of  the  tribes  residing  in  the  vicinity  of  our Settlement,  notwithstanding  the  melancholy  termination  of  our late  apparently  friendly  intercourse  which,  by  the  imprudence  of  some of  those  engaged  in  it,  ended  unfortunately  in  the  murder  of  Pratt  of the  Naval  Brigade;  the  entire  circumstances  of  that  melancholy  tragedy have  already  been  submitted  to  Government.  The  two  prisoners, Snowball  and  Jumbo,  have  been  treated  with  the  utmost  kindness  by the  men  of  the  Naval  Brigade  in  charge  of  whose  guard  they  remained as  prisoners  ;  but  notwithstanding  the  kindness  they  received from  these  generous-hearted  men,  still  I  perceived  that  no  advance- ment of  importance  had  or  was  likely  to  ensue  from  a  further  sojourn in  the  Barrack  guard,  though  unquestionably  by  their  lengthened
3174  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
stay  there  they  had  learnt  to  appreciate  and  value  our  kindness,  and to  a  certain  extent  confide  in  our  friendship.    This  in  itself  was  a great  step  gained,  yet  at  the  same  time  I  deemed  it  advisable  to adopt  other  more  active  and  advisable   measures  to   push  forward  in a  political  point   of  view  that   which  was  likely  to  be  of  lasting benefit  to  the  Settlement,    and   for  all   who  might    by  unforeseen causes  be  compelled  to  visit  these  unfriendly  shores,  and  attempt  the bold  step,  if  possible,  necessary  for  civilising  these  savage  people. I,   therefore,  after  succeeding  in  inducing  the   woman   known  as Madam  Cooper,  and  a  boy,  to  come  over  and  see  Snowball  and  Jumbo, thought  it  prudent  and  advisable  at  once  to  attempt  the  accomplish, ment  of  my  sincere  desire.     I,  therefore,  caused  a  house  to  be  built in  an  enclosure  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  a  bamboo  fence  in  a   well- inhabited  spot  on   Ross   Island ;  here   I  placed  a  guard  of  convict watchmen  with  instructions  to  guard  rigidly  the  prisoners  that  were now  about  to  be  entrusted  to  their  care,  but  to  do  so  in   a   way  not likely  to  excite  their  suspicions,  or  cause  their  distrust,   but  more  to wait  upon  them  and  attend  to  their  wants  like  servants.     When these  my  arrangements  were  completed,   I   removed   Snowball  and Jumbo,  along  with  the   woman  and  boy,  to  their  new   habitation, which  is  situated  sufficiently  near  my  own  house,  so  as  to  be  imme- diately under  my  own  personal  supervision.
"  Since  it  was  impossible  that  such  an  arduous  undertaking  as  I had  ventured  on  could  be  satisfactorily  carried  out  by  the  exertions of  one  individual,  I  solicited  the  Revd.  Mr.  Corbyu  to  render me  the  aid  of  his  valuable  assistance,  which  he  has  not  only most  willingly  and  cheerfully  afforded,  but  from  his  gentle  and conciliatory  disposition  has,  I  am  proud  to  say,  achievedgreat success  towards  the  accomplishment  of  this  desirable  and  important object  so  essential  for  the  future  welfare  in  every  way  of  this colony.
"  Since  the  arrival  of  the  woman  and  boy,  Mr.  Corbyn  has  been the  active  means  of  inducing,  from  time  to  time,  several  more  of the  aborigines  of  one,  if  not  two,  distant  tribes  to  visit  Ross  Island and  join  their  friends.  At  the  time  I  am  now  writing  this  letter,
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  375
viz.,  the  i5th  of  the  month,  we  have  no  less  than  28  of  the  abori- gines with  \is  in  the  enclosure  now  known  as  the  Andaman  Home, viz.,  11  men,  6  or  7  women,  the  rest  are  children,  one  of  whom  is but  a  little  infant  in  arms.  I  have  increased  the  number  of  huts  in the  enclosure,  and  in  fact  have  established  a  little  village  of  appa- rently confiding  savages  in  the  centre  of  Ross  Island.
"Their  hitherto  docile  conduct  and  good  behaviour  are  the astonishment  of  all  who  behold  such  a  truly  marvellous  change  after our  late  sad  and  fatal  disaster.  In  this  village  (or  rather  as  it  is termed  the  Andaman  Home)  they  are  treated  with  little  or  no  re- straint beyond  that  which  is  necessary  for  their  instruction.  Here they  may  be  seen  sitting  down,  some  working  and  making  baskets, the  women  sewing  clothes,  and  the  two  prisoners  learning  and  repeat- ing the  alphabet  of  the  English  language  under  the  guidance  of instructors  whom  I  have  appointed.  The  aborigines  appear  cheerful and  confiding,  and  exhibit  no  desire  to  leave  us — on  the  contrary,  they express  great  unwillingness  to  accompany  us  in  our  boats  for  fear  of being  taken  away  and  returned  to  their  wilds.
"  I  attribute  the  whole  of  this  strange  and  somewhat  marvellous change  to  the  management  and  assistance  rendered  to  me  by  the Revd.  Mr.  Corbyn,  who  at  my  request  is  most  zealously  prose- cuting and  carrying  out  my  views.  I  sincerely  trust  those  views  are in  accordance  with  the  wishes  of  Government,  and  that  they  will sanction  and  approve  of  my  conduct,  and  also  permit  me  to  incur  the slight  expense,  comparatively  speaking,  which  must  necessarily  attend the  achievement  of  such  a  great  object  as  the  civilising  of  tribes  of  a savage,  barbarous  people  like  those  inhabiting  the  Andamans.
"  I  shall  endeavour  to  do  so  as  economically  and  as  reasonably  as possible,  and  hope  to  do  so  with  a  sum  not  exceeding  one  hundred  or one  hundred  and  fifty  rupees  a  month  ;  for  unless  the  savages  are treated  with  every  kindness  and  consideration,  as  well  as  satisfied  by a  repletion  of  food,  I  find  that  they  become  morose  and  dissatisfied, which  it  is  desirable  that  in  the  infancy  of  my  undertaking  should be  entirely  avoided,  so  as  to  ensure  success  and  instil  in  them  a  liking
376  *  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
and  love  towards  us.  We  have  acquired  a  great  many  of  their words  and  sentences,  and  they  have  in  the  same  ratio  derived several  English  words  and  expressions,  a  full  account  of  which  will be  found  in  Mr.  Corbyn's  report,  which  I  have  the  honor  to attach.  "
The  following  letter,  No.  99,  dated  30th  June,  1863,  was  addressed by  Colonel  Tytier  to  Mr.  Corbyn  : —
"  I  have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  in  my  opinion  it  is  most essential  that  we  should  establish,  as  much  as  possible,  a  friendly intercourse  with  the  aborigines  of  this  island  ;  and  in  expressing  the sentiment,  I  firmly  believe  it  is  also  strictly  in  accordance  with  the desire  and  wishes  of  Government,  which  now  exist,  and  ever  did  exist from  the  very  first  commencement  of  the  Settlement.  To  obtain  and succeed  in  the  attainment  of  this  desirable  object,  the  greatest  cau- tion must  be  used,  so  that  a  system  of  entire  pacification,  and  by  no means  irritation,  should  be  our  course  pursued.  The  aborigines,  from our  experience  of  them,  have  proved  themselves  to  be  a  truly  savage, treacherous,  and  ungovernable  race  of  people,  devoid  of  civilisation, in  every  sense  of  the  word.  Knowing  tLen  the  difficulty  we  have  to contend  with,  I  have  deemed  it  necessary  to  publish  an  order,  prohi- biting everyone  from  going  over  to  the  North  Point,  or  to  any  other places  on  the  mainlaEd,  known  to  be  frequented,  or  constantly resorted  to,  by  the  aborigines,  without  my  special  permission ;  for notwithstanding,  however  kindly  or  well  meant  such  visits  may  be, yet  without  the  most  perfect  caution  some  slight,  unforeseen,  and unintentional  event  may  completely  mar  and  frustrate  all  my  plans. I,  therefore,  placing  every  strict  confidence  in  your  naturally  mild and  conciliatory  disposition,  entrust  the  management  and  care  of  this great  attempt  to  your  discretion  and  judgment,  and  I  request  TQU will  assist  me,  as  much  as  lies  in  your  power,  to  carry  out  this important  object,  which  I  firmly  believe  is  the  wish  of  Government, the  particulars  of  which  I  shall  do  myself  the  honour  of  laying  before them  by  this  very  mail,  and  trust  my  conduct  will  meet  with  their approval.  It  will  always  afford  me  great  pleasure  to  render  you every  assistance  in  my  power,  at  the  same  time  I  shall  feel  obliged
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  377
for  any  suggestions  you  may  deem  necessary  to  propose  for  carrying out  this  important  project.
"  The  number  of  aborigines  we  now  have  on  Ross  Island  amounts  to nearly  12  men,  women,  and  children,  a  number  I  conceive  at   present sufficient  for  all  our  requirements.     As  far  as  any  friendly  intercourse being  hastily  and  rapidly  gained  on  a  firm  and  lasting  base  with   such savages,  I  question  much   in   the  present   infancy   of  our  plans,   for whenever  these  people  have  an  opportunity,  they   will,   in  their   low cunning  and  blinded  ignorance,  presume  on  our  generosity  and  kind- ness ;  we  may  then  reasonably  expect  this  will  always  be  their   chief aim,  and  we  must  ever,  therefore,  be  prepared  to  meet  this  line  of  con- duct on  their  part  without  exciting  suspicions,  and   also   by  mildness frustrating  their  plans   and    gaining   our  object.     I,  therefore,  wish that  the  aborigines  we  have  be  regularly  taught  the  English  language and  that  with  firmness,  decision,  and  kindness,  as  we  would  instruct children  undergoing  similar  tuition  ;  we   do  not  require  them   to  be taught  or  employed  in  mat  or  basket-making,   or  other  work,  which, though  desirable  at  all  times  in  themselves,  are  at  present  but  of  little use  or  value  to  the  Settlement ;  but  confine  our  actions  to  one  great and  chief  object,  viz.,  being  able  to  acquire  the  means  of  mutual understanding  with  them,  which  can  alone  be  obtained  by   the  aid   of language.    It  is  satisfactory  to  know  that  at  present  they  evince  no desire  to  leave  us,  nor  is  it  desirable  that  they  should  do  so.     I  there- fore require  that  the  course  of  training  pursued  be  conducted  in  away that  they  will  learn  to  appreciate  their  now  comfortable  home  and mode   of  living  ;  and  although   it  is   desirable   that   those   we   now have  should  not  leave  us,  or  again  be  allowed  to  run  wild  in   their woods,  it  is  equally  desirable  that  we  should  not  bring  more  over  who, in    their  fresh  and   ungovernable  state  of  wildness,  would  materially tend  to   retard  the  advancement  of  those  we  have.     I   would,  there- fore, wish  that  no  more  be  induced  to  come  over  at  present,  but  think it  desirable  that  occasionally,  about  once  a  fortnight,  a  few  might with  advantage  be  induced  to  come  over  for  a  very  short  visit,  so as  to  satisfy  their  tribes  on  their  return  of  the  care  we  take  of  their people  living  under  our  charge,    and  after  feeding  and  otherwise
3  c
378
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
kindly  treating  them  to  return  them  to  their  woods.  By  this  means we  secure  a  double  advantage.
"  1st — They  must  see  the  superior  comforts  of  civilisation  com- pared to  their  miserable  savage  condition  ;  and
2nd.— Though  not  immediately  apparent,  we  are  in  reality  laying the  foundation  stone  for  civilising  a  people  hitherto  living  in  a  per- fectly barbarous  state,  replete  with  treachery,  murder,  and  every other  savageness  ;  besides  which  it  is  very  desirable,  even  in  a  politi- cal point  of  view,  keeping  these  people  in  our  custody  as  hostages, for  it  undoubtedly  secures  the  better  behaviour  of  these  inhospitable people  towards  our  Settlement ;  whereas  their  leaving  us  might  injure and  abolish  all  the  good  that  has  already  been  established,  and  might take  years  again  to  regain  and  recover  were  we  to  lose  the  great advantage  we  now  hold  and  possess.  "
(I  have  quoted  these  two  letters  of  Colonel  Ty tier's  verbatim,  and in  full,  as  they  show  his  policy  towards  the  Andamanese,  and justify  Mr.  Corbyn  in  the  repressive  conduct  he  was  afterwards  blam- ed for  using  to  them.  Colonel  Tytler's  action  in  keeping  women  and children  as  permanent  prisoners  was  illegal,  and  his  attempt  to  teach them  English  was  a  mistake.  They  should  have  been  allowed  to  pick up  a  colloquial  knowledge  of  Urdu  from  their  convict  attendants. — >
M.  r.  p.)
NARRATIVE
Of  the  Eevd.  Henry  Corbyn,  relative  to  the  Aborigines  of  the Andaman  Islands,  submitted  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Tytler  for  the information  of  Government.  Dated,  Hoss  Island,  the  2nd  July, 1863.
Having  been  requested  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Tytler,  Superin- tendent of  the  Settlement,  to  state,  for  the  information  of  Govern- ment, the  various  circumstances  of  chief  interest  which  have  come under  my  observation  in  my  relations  with  the  aboriginal  inhabitants of  these  islands,  with  whom  I  have  associated,  perhaps  more  than  any other  European,  since  my  arrival  at  the  Andamans,  I  proceed
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
to  recount  in  detail  tho  iaformation  which  I  have  gathered  with regard  to  these  people,  their  character  and  habits,  describing  the progress  of  my  intercourse  with  them,  commencing  from  the  date  of the  two  Andamanese  prisone  s  named  Snowball  and  Jumbo  having been  placed  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Tytler  tinder  my  instruction.
These  prisoners  had  for  several  months  been  retained  in  fetters  at the  Naval  Barracks  under  a  guard  of  the  Naval  Brigade,  by  whom  they were  treated  with  much  kindness  and  indulgence,  and  regarded  with an  interest  which  they  appear  to  have  appreciated  in  the  intimacy which  sprung  up  and  the  friendly  attachment  which  they  show  to many  of  the  sailors.  The  two  prisoners,  however,  though  indulged  in every  wish  compatible  with  safe  custody,  were  regarded  more  as objects  of  idle  curiosity  than  as  rational  beings  capable  of  cultivation and  improvement.  People  flocked  to  visit  them  as  they  would  visit wild  beasts  in  a  menagerie,  and  on  these  occasions  the  untutored savages  would  laugh,  and  dance,  and  perform  various  antics  to  elicit mirth  and  gifts  from  the  spectators.  They  were  never  allowed  to leave  the  barracks,  and  were  generally  to  be  seen  lying  on  the  stone floor  in  the  verandah  with  nothing  but  a  small  strip  of  cloth  round the  lower  part  of  the  body.  Any  other  clothing  given  to  them  they reluctantly  adopted,  and  chiefly  made  use  of  to  fasten  together  their food  and  other  trifles  comprising  the  property  of  which  they  became gradually  possessed.
About  three  weeks,  or  nearly  a  month  ago,  some  more  of  their tribe  having  been  seen  on  the  mainland  at  North  Point,  a  party  of sailors  was  despatched,  who  brought  back  an  Andamanese  woman, the  wife  of  Jumbo,  known  as  Madam  Cooper  and  now  called  Topsy, and  a  boy,  supposed  to  be  a  brother  of  one  of  the  prisoners.  Soon after  their  arrival,  I  proposed  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Tytler  to  instruct them  all  in  English,  and  they  were  brought  to  me  daily  to  the  Super- intendent's house  to  learn  the  English  alphabet.
Our  first  interview  was  of  a  very  droll  character.  I  showed  them. books  with  pictures,  endeavouring  to  make  them  trace,  and  identify, and  pronounce  by  name  in  their  own  language  each  of  the  objects represented,  but  when  we  afterwards  turned  to  the  alphabet,  and  they
3c  2
380  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
were  made  to  understand  that  it  was  to  be  frequently  repeated  till committed  to  memory,  they  became  impatient,  and  at  first  attempted to  avoid  the  task  by  jesting  and  shouting,  and  afterwards  by  other expedients,  such  as  pretending  that  their  heads  ached,  or  by  diverting attention  to  other  trivial  matters.
By  coaxing  and  humouring  them  I  succeeded  for  some  time  in  fixing their  attention,  teaching  one  by  one,  for  it  was  impossible  to  keep  all  to the  task  at  the  same  time.  The  boy  would  rush  off  to  one  end  of  the room  and  dance  and  shout  defiance.  Madam  Cooper  would  fling  her- self into  an  easy  chair,  and  once,  before  I  had  time  to  check  her, threw  herself  at  full  length  on  a  bed  on  which  she  left  the  marks  of her  body  bedaubed  with  red  mud.  Another  would  run  to  the  door and  call  for  judder  (cocoanuts)  (Jeder — M.  V-  P.)  and  Panoo (water)  (Urdu — M.  V.  P.),  or  as  they  more  generally  called  it — "  tin pot  water,"  or  a  light  for  a  cigar  (the  use  of  which  they  had  learnt from  the  sailors),  or  else  seize  something  on  the  table  and  set  the  rest into  screams  of  laughter  by  his  remarks  and  grimaces.  This  insane frolic  would  go  on  from  day  to  day,  almost  baffling  my  efforts  to civilise  and  instruct  them.  I  was  obliged  at  length  to  use  coercive measures,  which  however  were  not  without  risk,  for  whenever  they were  slapped,  they  would  slap  in  return,  and  use  jocular  or  abusive remarks,  which  provoked  roars  of  laughter  from  the  rest  at  my expense.  The  savage  boy  one  day  brought  with  him  a  bodkin,  and when  I  enforced  his  attention  to  his  lesson  as  usual  by  holding  his head  over  the  book  and  making  him  repeat  the  letters,  he  pointed  it  at my  eyes  with  a  sign  that  he  would  pierce  them  with  it,  unless  I  gave up  that  obnoxious  mode  of  teaching  him.  I  am  glad  to  say  that  per- severance in  my  course  has  been  rewarded  by  the  unquestionable proof  exhibited  that  the  Andamanese,  who  are  most  imitative  and possessed  of  extraordinary  memory  and  quick  intelligence,  may  soon acquire  our  language,  and  it  has  justified  my  opinion  that  a  much higher  object  might  be  attained  in  the  compulsory  confinement  of these  savages  than  merely  impressing  them  with  a  sense  of  our liberality,  and  the  generous  treatment  they  experience,  which,  as savages,  and  without  pure  enlightenment,  they  would  perhaps
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  3Q1
not  understand,  or  might  look  upon  as  a  reward  for  their  buffoon- ery, and  the  sport  they  afforded  to  the  sailors  and  others  who  visited them.
(In  about  a  month  Snowball  and  Jumbo  were  able  to  repeat  the whole  alphabet,  and  to  distinguish  and  ,  point  out  each  letter  sepa- rately, so  that  when  a  bundle  of  wooden  letters  were  shown  to  them they  could  at  once  select  the  letter  asked  for.)
Soon  after  the  arrival  of  Topsy,  alias  Madam  Cooper,  and  the  boy Sambo,   Colonel  Tytler  conceived  a  plan  for  locating  the  Andamanese prisoners  with  the  new  comers,  and  any  others  of  the  tribe  who  might subsequently   arrive,  in  a  small  house  on  the  island  not  far  from  the bazaar,  where  they  would  be  watched  by  a  strong  guard  of  Natives,  but otherwise  enjoy  full  liberty,  and  their  education  continue  to  be  con- ducted.    In  the  course  of  time   the   place   expanded,  and  what  was intended   to  be   a  solitary  house  for  one  small  family  has  become  the centre    of    a   cluster  of    houses,   in  a   compound   railed   in,    which are    called   "The   Andaman   Home."     These   have  been  peacefully tenanted   by  the    savage  aborigines,  in  no  way   restricted   in   their liberty,   whose   approach   to  these   shores  would  not  long  since  have caused  consternation  through  the  Settlement.     Only  last  week  there were  no  less  than  28  Andamanese  assembled  in  the  Andaman  Home, a  sight  which  elicited  comments  expressive  of  unaffected  astonishment and  gratification  from  crowds  of  Europeans  and  Natives   who   wit- nessed  it.     Their   submissive  and  orderly  conduct,  good  temper,  and the  pleasure  they  evinced,  were  pledges  of  good  understanding  which, if  discreetly  maintained  and  not  interrupted  by  acts  of  violence  on  our part,  will,  I  am  convinced,  ripen  into  an  intimacy  and   warm   attach- ment, and  be  productive  of  incalculable   blessings  both  to  us  and  to this  benighted  outcast  race,  with  whom  our  lot  has  brought  us  into contact.
(Considering  the  coercion  exercised  to  keep  the  Andamanese  in  the "  Home,  "  the  fact  that  their  only  reason  for  coming  there  was  to  see the  two  prisoners  Snowball  and  Jumbo ;  and  the  circumstances  attend- ing the  murder  of  Pratt  and  the  consequent  imprisonment  of  these two  men,  the  above  reads  somewhat  queerly. — M.  V.  P.)
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
But  I  have  yet  to  relate  how  this  good   understanding  has  been effected.     Colonel  Tytler  having  one  evening  observed   one  of  the Andamanese  fishing  up  to  his  waist  in  water  on  North  Point,  deter- mined to  send  his  boat  with  men  of  the  Naval  Brigade  to  invite   some of  them.    I  volunteered  with  the  Superintendent's  Tutor,  Mr.  Redpath, to  accompany  the  party  ;  my  chief  object  being  to  restrain  the   sailor, from  any  deprecable  act,  such  as  on  a  former  occasion  led  to  unfore- seen calamity.    Having  rowed  to  the  point  to  which  through  the telescope  I  had  seen  the  smoke  issuing  from  their  camp,   at  about 300  yards  from   the  land,  we  rested  on   our   oars  and  shouted  to the  natives,  showing  plantains  and  other  fruits  by  which  they  are usually  attracted.    One  by  one  they  came  out   stealthily.     From  the sound  of  voices  there  must  have  been  numbers  concealed  in  the  bushes. At  first  two  came  towards  the   boat   with   bows   and   arrows, the  sight  of  these  I  was  at  first  apprehensive  of  danger  to  our  party, but  the  sailors  assured  me  that  they  invariably  brought  weapons  as presents  to  them  in  return  for  coconuts  and  plantains.    We,  therefore, continued  to  hail  them,  and  soon  five  of  them  swam  out  and  were  taken into  the  boat,  when  they  immediately  gave  up  their  bows,  and  one  of them,  knowing  our  habits,  brought  a  large  blazing  log  to  light  cigars. (The  Andamanese  were  no  doubt  well  acquainted  with  the  Naval Brigadesmen,  who  used  to  go  over  to  North  Point  and  sit  in  their camps.    Fire  was  first  brought  for  their  pipes,  and  then  women  were asked  for.    The  weapons   of  the  Andamanese  were  also  taken  away, and  some  trifles  given  in  exchange.— M.  V.  P.)
No  sooner  were  they  in  the  boat  than  they  at  once  took   possession of  all  the  fruit,  bread,  and  biscuits,  which  they  concluded  were  for them,  and  devoured  them  with  the  keenest    appetite.     One   of  them hearing  the  sailors  call  for  more  bows  and  arrows  jumped  out  of  the boat  and  swam  again  to  the  shore,  but  as  it  was  late  in  the  evening  we returned.     Some  others  of   the  party  came  out  on  the  beach,  but seemed  doubtful  from  the  delay   whether  or  not  they   intended come  with  us.    The  four  Andamanese  whom  we  brought  over  were woman  known  as  Queen  Victoria,  and  re-named  by  me  Bess,  and  three men  who  are  well  known  as  Joe,  Jacko,  and  Jingo.     It  was  thought
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  353
advisable  to  employ  the  new  party  as  well  as  the  former  comers,  and accordingly  Snowball  and  Jumbo,  besides  their  instruction  in  the alphabet,  were  set  to  work  at  basket  and  morah  making,  at  which Jingo,  a  very  quiet  and  tractable  man,  but  who  at  first  seemed  the most  unruly,  assisted  them  ;  while  Jacko  and  Joe  were  daily  instructed by  a  Burmese  to  make  bamboo  matting  for  flooring,  the  women Topsy  and  Bess  receiving  lessons  in  sewing.  They  all  showed  a strong  disinclination  to  do  work  of  any  kind.  Joe,  who  is  a  very dodging  and  deceptive  man,  but  extremely  playful,  almost  always laughing  and  in  high  spirits,  would  try  every  artifice  to  escape  the  mat- work,  at  one  time  making  a  show  of  working  hard  at  it,  and  as  soon  as he  was  not  observed  quietly  sliding  into  a  corner,  or  pretending  to  be raking  the  fire,  or  to  want  something  left  on  the  machan,  or  to  be under  the  necessity  of  going  out  for  a  few  moments,  or  else  simulating illness,  or  if  all  these  shifts  failed,  half  petulant,  half  amused,  with  a  bel- low of  disgust  returning  to  his  work,  only  to  try  the  same  tricks  again and  to  jest  at  all  around  him.  Jacko  showed  a  more  pugnacious spirit,  and  was  inclined  to  resist  with  force  till  he  found  such  resist- ance unavailing.  The  same  opposition  was  encountered  in  teaching Topsy  and  Bess  sewing,  but  they  were  soon  overcome  by  firmness  ; and  though  now,  for  other  important  reasons,  these  industrial  occupa- tions have  been  abandoned,  yet  in  the  time  they  were  thus  employed both  the  Andamanese  women  gave  proof  that  they  had  a  real  aptitude for  delicate  manual  labour,  and  that  they  would  be  capable  of  doing the  finest  work  in  sewing  under  a  proper  course  of  training.  I  was amused  the  other  day,  on  returning  from  the  woods  where  I  had  torn my  trousers — as  soon  as  Topsy  caught  sight  of  the  rent  she  "pointed  it out  to  the  other  Andamanese  woman,  and  condoling  with  me  as  my le"  was  slightly  cut  and  bleeding,  neatly  put  the  slit  pieces  of  the cloth  together  again  and  said,  and  shewed,  how,  when  she  returned  to to  Ross  Island,  she  would  get  a  needle  and  thread  and  stitch  them.  I mention  these  trifling  points  as  they  serve  to  bring  more  vividly before  the  mind's  eye  the  movements  and  actions,  the  habits,  charac- ter, and  dispositions  of  the  curious  and  interesting  people  of  whom  I am  writing.
384
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
I  now  adopted  the  practice  of  taking  with  me  in  my  walks  about the  island  and  in  boat  excursions  two  or  three  of  the  Andamanese men,  in  hopes  that  a  confiding  familiarity  and  friendship  would  result from  this  constant  companionship,  andt  hat  the  Andamanese  might hereafter  act  the  part  of  guides  and  prove  of  assistance  in  visiting places  on  the  mainland.
Having  been  one  day  invited  to  Chatham  to  go  with  Captain  Heath and  Lieutenant  Carr  to  pick  coral  on  Blair's  Reef,  I  took  with  me  Joe and  Jacko,  and  on  our  arrival  at  Chatham  such  a  crowd  of  natives assembled  to  see  the  dreaded  savages  that  we  had  the  greatest  difficulty in  landing  and  making  our  way  through  them  to  the  officer's  quarters. The  crowd  followed  us  and  surrounded  Captain  Heath's  house,  when to  divert  them  I  told  Joe  and  Jacko  to  dance  on  the  boards  to  the sound  of  our  hand-clapping.  They  performed  the  evolutions  very gracefully  and  with  astonishing  agility,  their  arms  extended  slantingly above  them  and  just  touching  at  the  fingers,  their  feet  almost  sliding on  the  boards,  and  with  a  rapidity  which  could  only  be  surpassed  by running.  They  kept  up  these  feats  longer  than  usual,  and  at  last  Joe thinking  the  crowd  too  exacting,  ran  down  and  "  tirpah'd  "  (danced) right  and  left  amongst  them,  kicking  out  vigorously  on  all  sides,  and both  he  and  Jacko  almost  bursting  with  laughter  at  the  sight  of  the frightened  natives  tumbling  over  one  another,  and  the  rapid  clearance which  was  soon  effected.  It  was  now  the  turn  of  Joe  and  Jacko  to be  diverted,  so  they  insisted  on  making  some  of  the  spectators  dance while  they  clapped  their  hands  to  keep  time  and^encourage  them.
The  sepoys  made  them  a  fire  at  which  they  roasted  unripe  plantains, and  lying  leisurely  on  the  ground  chatted  and  laughed  with  the  natives, pulling  about  the  sepoys  and  examining  with  interest  their  clothes  and accoutrements.  While  we  were  wading  on  the  coral  reef,  Joe  and  Jacko sat  for  some  time  on  a  rock  in  mute  astonishmeut,  evidently  perplexed at  our  taking  the  trouble  to  collect  what  they  apparently  considered common  bits  of  rock  and  rubbish.  By  way  of  accelerating  our  collec- tion, they  brought  me  heaps  of  worthless  deposits  of  stones  and  shells which  I  gratefully  rejected.  They  then  began  to  shout  impatiently,  and to  appease  them  I  proceeded  with  them  to  the  plantain  grove,  at
WITH  THE  ANDAMAN i  335
the  sight  of  which  they  were  again  in  ecstasies,  "  tirpahing "  and hallooing  till  their  shouts  and  echoes  through  the  woods  drew  down  the Is'ativo  Guard,  who  looked  in  their  alarm  tantalizingly  disposed  to  fell them  on  the  spot  had  we  not  interfered  to  protect  them.  We  had  not a  knife  to  cut  the  bunches  of  plantains  from  the  houghs,  which  were too  thick  for  the  strongest  of  us  to  break  them  ;  but  Joe  showed  his ready  ingenuity  and  the  quick  contrivance  and  inventiveness  of  his race  by  taking  from  the  beach  a  small  sharp  pointed  shell  with  which they  brought  down  bough  after  hough  of  plantains.  On  our  return to  Chatham  I  remained  to  dine,  and  after  Joe  and  Jacko  had  regaled themselves  with  food  and  became  tired  of  sporting  with  the  Natives, they  came  to  me  constantly,  calling  "  mio,"  "  mio,"  (Mala  "  Sir" — M.  V.  P.),  which,  as  it  is  always  used  in  addressing  us,  I  suppose must  mean  "  friend  "  or  "  protector,  "  and  hegged  mo  to  take  them back,  not  to  their  own  houses  but  to  their  "  boudla "  (home)  on Ross  Island.  (Bud-fa  "house" — M.  V.  P.).  It  was  stormy  and dark,  and  being  strangers  to  the  place,  they  were  naturally  alarmed at  the  delay,  and  came  to  me  twining  themselves  round  me  for  pro- tection ;  in  fact  I  could  hardly  rid  myself  of  them  during  the  interval of  my  meal ;  but  having  succeeded  at  last  in  explaining  to  them  that after  I  had  dined  I  would  return  with  them  to  Ross,  they  laid  down on  a  bench  and  wrapped  themselves  with  my  coat  and  razai,  and  slept soundly  till  I  awoke  them  about  10  at  night,  and  brought  them  back with  me  to  this  island.
On  my  return  in  the  boat  they  both  kept  cuddling  me  and giving  other  demonstrations  of  affection  :  indeed,  they  all  now  do  the same  whenever  I  visit  them,  or  bring  them  in  our  boats.  I  am  almost crushed  by  the  weight  of  their  embraces,  the  most  objectionable result  being  that  when  it  is  over,  my  face,  hands,  and  clothes  are suffused  all  over  with  daubs  of  the  red  mud  with  which  they  are painted,  and  which  is  so  adhesive  that  the  hardest  washing  and brushing  will  sometimes  fail  to  remove  them.
My  next  expedition  to  the  mainland  was  on  Monday  the  22ud  of June  in  the  Superintendent's  cutter  with  the  Superintendent's  crew, thirteen  men  of  the  Naval  Brigade.
3D
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS obo   
  —     i  -
Colonel  Tytler  gave  us  a  pig  with  some  fruit  and  biscuits  as  a present  to  the  aborigines.
We  took  over  with  us  Joe,  Jacko,  Jingo,  and  the  boy  Sambo,  who bad  Ion-  been  suffering  from  fever  and  headache,  which  I  treated, and  afterwards  Mr.  Carthy,  the  apothecary,  but  both  of  us  ineffec
tually.
We  landed  on  North  Point,  where  several  women  and who  have  since  been  over  to  Boss,  came  wading  out  to  meet  us.
We  landed  one  by  one  very  cautiously,  the  sailors  with  loaded  and half-cocked  muskets,  and  I  and  my  servants  with  revolvers.
By  this  time  Joe  and  the  rest  having  seen  me  continually  coming to  the  Andaman  Home,  and  taking  the  general  management,  had conceived  the  idea  that  I  was  a  chief,  an  idea  which  was  probably strengthened  by  the  fact  of  my  height  and  size,  and  Joe  intimating sornethin-  of  the  kind  to  the  women,  they  lavished  the  most  gracious smiles  on  me,  and  came  inquisitively  surveying  me,  feeling  my muscles  and  examining  my  hands,  fingers,  and  nails ;  one  of  the  women quite  took  possession  of  me  for  the  rest  of  thaday,  throwing  her  arms round  my  neck,  and  frequently  jumping  on  my  shoulders  to  mab me  carry  her  over  difficult  passes  on  the  road.  The  women  soon  tire in  walking,  and  we  all  of  us  had  at  times  to  submit  to  be  made  beasts of  burden  to  accelerate  their  progress.
(The  Andamanese  women  can  walk  very  well  and  far,  and  were only  playing  the  fool  with  Mr.  Corbyn  and  his  party. -
I  carefully  examined  their  coast,  and  found  in  the  wood,  a  few paces  from  the  shore,  one  of  their  huts,  which  was  formed  simply of  two  long  circular  canes  stuck  at  each  end  into  the  ground  and covered  with  slight  palm  thatching,  open  altogether  at  the  front,  and with  only  enough  space  inside  for  their  fire,  and  three  or  four  of  them, closely  packed  together.  The  women  and  children,  or  invalids, generally  take  possession  of  the  hut,  warming  themselves  over  the
hot  ashes.
They  apparently  take  no  pains  to  sweep  or  clean  their  camp,  t which  always  arises  offensive  emuvia  of  decayed  fish  and  accumulated filth,  which  would  become  even  to  them  most   unwholesome  and.  w«
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  «„,-
sufferable,   but   that  shell  fish  crawling  all  over  the  camp  performed the  kindly  office  of  scavengers. — (Hermit  Crabs — M.  P.  P.)
About  the  camp  in  recesses  of  trees  and  thick  bushes  are  deposited their  acquired  gains  and  treasures ;  they  are  most  careful  to  conce  il out  of  sight  their  weapons  and  all  articles  of  value,  none  of  which  have been  found  by  any  of  our  party  in  our  wanderings  through  the  woods. I  believe  that  they  are  all  carried  to  a  principal  camp  far  into  the interior,  none  of  the  beads  or  any  of  our  gifts  which  they  value  having ever  again  been  seen  by  us.
(The  Andamanose  had  as  usual  hidden  their  goods  when  they  saw the  strangers  coming,  and  the  presents  had  long  since  been  passed  on from  hand  to  hand  about  the  islands. — M.  V.  P.)
We  found  near  the  camp  small  baskets  with  fish,  small  nets,  nails, and  bottles.  They  form  on  the  shore  artificial  tanks  filled  with  salt water,  in  which  they  place  superfluous  stocks  of  live  fish,  to  serve them,  I  suppose,  when  hindered  from  fishing  in  rough  weather.  One of  these  was  discovered  by  a  native  convict,  who,  supposing  that  the fish  had  been  left  there  on  the  ebbing  of  the  tide,  immediately  began to  shoal  them  out,  to  the  annoyance  of  the  Andamanese,  till  I  stopped him,  and  had  them  all  picked  up  again  and  replaced  in  the  water. (Mr.  Corbyn  has  made  some  mistake  in  what  he  saw.  No  such custom  exists  among  any  of  the  Andamanese  tribes. — M.  V.  P.)
I  always  gave  strict  injunctions,  which  are  creditably  observed  by both  sailors  and  natives,  not  to  touch  anything  belonging  to  the Andamanese,  nor  to  ask  for  bows  and  arrows  and  other  implements which  are  necessary  for  their  subsistence,  so  that  nothing  should  occur to  produce  unfriendly  feeling  between  us.  On  the  occasion  to  which I  refer  I  gave  directions  to  Conner,  the  coxswain,  to  land  some  of  the crew,  and  order  the  rest  to  keep  a  short  distance  out  to  sea,  watching and  following  us  as  we  went  along  the  coast  to  the  further  camo  of the  aborigines,  to  which  they  beckoned  us  to  proceed.  As  soon  as we  were  safely  landed,  the  pig,  fruit,  and  biscuits  were  given  to  the savages,  who  ravenously  seized  upon  them  with  the  intention  of  at once  carrying  them  to  their  further  camp.  The  women  at  the  sight of  the  pig  yelled  and  clapped  their  hands,  and  forming  a  circle  round
3  D  2
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
it  enioyed  a  wild  and  spontaneous   tirpah,   into  which  they  threw themselves  with   unbounded   glee   and   spirit;  while   the  men  seized the  pig    one  by  the  throat,  another  by  the  ears,  another  by  the  legs, and  another  hy  the   tail,   and  looked  around  for  an  instrument  for its  destruction.     Joe  seein-  my  dagger  asked  the  loan  of  it,  and  with one  gash   through  the  throat  and  from  bone  to  bone,  instantaneously despatched  his  prey.     They  then  cut  some  flexible  branches  of   long creepers  and  fastened  first  the  two  front  and  two  hind  legs,  and all  four  legs  together ;  then  with  stronger  creepers  they  made  a  bundle of  the  pig  and,  fastening  to  it  a  branch  long  enough  to  suspend  round their  shoulders,  motioned  to  me  to  proceed.     Joe,  when  he  carried nio.  let  the  whole  weight  rest  by  a  branch  on  his  chest  or  neck,  the women  always  on  the  forehead.     We  had  a  large  party,  but  with Conner's  able  management  the  sailors   were  kept  together,  and most  perfect  discipline  maintained.    When  we  came   to   their   middle camp,  consisting  of  two  huts  similar  to  the  one  described,  they   made preparations  to   cook  the   pig,  taking   out   the   entrails   whicl washed,  and  placed  it  without  further  preparation  on  a  pil,
which  they  roasted  it  entire.
Before  they  arrived  in  this  camp,  they  concealed   in   a   bus
bn-   of   biscuits   and  plantains   which  we  had  given  them.     We  had difficulty  in  persuading  tbem  to  go  further.     Joe  and   the  girl  Polly, who  had  so  tenderly   caressed  me,  and  two  or  three  other  boys accompanied  us,  and  we  went  on  for  about  two  miles  along  the  shore, and  then  in  our  boats  to  the  large  bay  on  the  ridge  of  which  their chief  exterior  camp  is  situated.     This  place  appears  to  be  a  rendez- vous for  many  separate  tribes  who  roam  all  over  the  mainland, our  arrival  we  saw  only  two  or  three  of  the  inhabitants,  who  had  been attracted  by  our  shouts'of "  Mio,  "  "  Rogo  "  (meat),  but  more  gradually emerging  from  all  parts  of  the  forest.     A  form  of  salutation  which  we bave  learnt  from  them  was  to  take  the  hand  and  blow  on  it  making  t sound  of  a  kiss,  which  they  returned  in  the  same  manner-a  salutation which  they  use  to  each  other  as  well  as  to  us,  and  which  we  conclude, therefore,  to  be  a  token  of  friendship  and  fidelity.     (It  simply   means *  farewell."— M.  V.  P.)   One  of  them,  a  man,  came  limping  from  the
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  359
woods  with  a  wooden  staff  which  he  held  in  his  right  hand  ;  he  glided up  to  me  and  put  his  knife  into  my  hand,  a  rude  weapon  formed  o£ iron  hoop  fastened  to  a  piece  of  wood  which  was  covered  with  notches or  hieroglyphics.  He  had  a  sword  gash,  which  was  raw  and  bleeding, on  his  right  foot.  On  Joe's  speaking  to  him  of  me  he  asked  for Snowball,  and  pointed  to  his  feet,  as  if  to  intimate  his  wish  that Snowball  might  be  released.
An  aged  woman  now  came  up,  a  fierce  looking  virago  ;  she  appeared idiotic-,  and  talked  loud  and  angrily,  as  if  cursing.  I  made  the^  usual saluation  Avhicb  she  returned,  but  after  doing  so  gnashed  her  tooth close  to  my  hand,  and  then  contemptuously  flung  it  from  her,  as  much as  to  signify  that  she  had  a  good  will  to  bite  and  tear  me  if  she could.  She  exhibited  the  same  animosity  to  othur  Europeans.  I concluded  that  she  was  insane,  and  she  may  possibly  have  been rendered  fierce  by  losing  a  son  or  other  near  relative  in  affrays  with Europeans.
(Such  cases  are  often  seen.  She  did  not  approve  of  strangers,  and her  husband,  child,  or  some  relation  had  probably  been  killed  or  in- jured  by  us   M.  P.  P.)
The  other  savages  were  extremely  demonstrative  in  their  friend- ship; most  of  them  felt  my  limbs,  and  examined  my  hands  and fingers,  as  if  tracing  the  veins ;  they  pointed  with  pleasure  to  a souvenir  which  I  wore,  given  to  me  by  Polly,  a  piece  of  her  coral bracelet  which  she  had  fastened  to  my  necktie.  After  joining  in their  dance  we  embraced  them  and  returned,  bringing  with  us  a  small axe  and  some  bows  and  arrows  which  they  offered  us  of  their  own accord  ;  none  of  them  showed  an  inclination  to  return  with  us,  the pig  which  we  had  left  behind  being  for  the  time  the  absorbing  attrac- tion.
On  Thursday,  the  25th,  I  again  proceeded  with  a  Native  crew  to North  Point.  Joe,  Jacko,  and  Jingo  were  the  first  to  swim  out,  and were  soon  followed  by  crowds  of  women  and  children.  The  confidence of  the  aborigines  had  been  fully  regained,  and  our  only  difficulty  now was  to  accommodate  the  number  that  wished  to  be  conveyed  over.  One of  the  stealthy  urchins  was  no  sooner  in  the  boat,  than  he  descried  a
390
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
bag  of  coconuts,  and  before  I  could  call  to  arrest  his  design,  with  the speed  of  magic  he  had  dived  with  the  bag  into  the  water.  He  re- appeared at  the  distance  of  some  yards  off,  and  turning  his  head wagged  it  at  us,  laughing  at  his  own  dexterity  and  the  success  of  his cunning.  We  saw  him  shoving  the  bag  before  him,  and  with  a  few plunges  more  he  reached  the  shore,  and  disappeared  with  it  into  the jungle.  He  seemed  quite  unconscious  of  any  culpability  in  his  con- duct, or  may  have  presumed  on  our  ignorance  or  indulgence,  for  the next  morning  he  appeared  amongst  a  fresh  party  which  we  brought over  to  this  island.
I  contented  myself  with  bringing  on  this  occasion  only  a  few  of the  younger  children  and  women,  one  with  an  infant  in  arms.  I  was surprised  to  see  this  infant  after  satisfying  itself  from  its  mother's breast  clamour  to  her  to  hold  down  her  mouth,  and  try  with  its  tiny arms  resting  on  her  necklace  to  raise  its  mouth  to  kiss,  but  its  object was  explained  by  the  mother  putting  her  lips  down  to  her  child's  and giving  it  from  her  mouth  some  munched  coconut  which  the  child  had watched  her  chewing.  The  other  women  occasionally  gave  it  food and  water  in  just  the  same  way  that  birds  impart  nourishment  to their  young.
On  the  afternoon  of  the  25th  of  June  I  went  over  with  Joey Jingo,  and  Jacko,  and  three  Andamanese  boys,  to  one  of  the  chief posts  of  the  Settlement,  called  Haddo.  Near  this  post  is  the  plantain grove,  our  previous  visit  to  which  I  have  already  described.  Joe's  and Jacko's  agreeable  reminiscences  of  that  visit  made  them  very  desirous to  repeat  it.  We  went  once  more  accordingly  with  Colonel  Tytler's permission,  and  after  supplying  ourselves  with  a  moderate  quantity of  plantains  and  sugar-cane,  which  the  aborigines  were  allowed  to  cut themselves,  a  liberty  which  enhanced  their  value,  we  walked  down  to Haddo,  where  Mr.  Jones,  the  Overseer,  met  us.  As  soon  as  the  arrival of  the  Andamanese  became  known  there,  the  whole  of  Haddo  turned out — men,  women  and  children,  of  the  latter  there  was  a  large  display, Haddo  being  the  post  for  married  natives.  The  Andamanese  were  all  in their  element,  as  they  are  naturally  well  disposed  to  women,  aud childishly  fond  of  children.  The  natives  swarmed  to  Mr.  Jones*
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
ground  and  called  upon  the  Andamanese  to  go  through  the  usual  per- formance of  dancing,  which  Joe  again  applied  to  the  useful  purpose of  clearing  a  crowd.  His  "  whoop,  "  "  whoop,  "  "  whoop,  "  and  wild sonorous  war  shouts  exciting  exclamations  of  terror  from  the  crowds of  gaping  spectators.
(The  wrong  sound  is  given,  and  the  Andamanese  have  no  war shout.— M.  P.  P.)
Their  alarm  was  increased  when  I  placed  a  bow  and  arrow in  Joejs  hands  and  pointed  to  a  target  on  the  rocks  at  which he  was  directed  to  aim.  His  arrow  carried  about  40  yards  and  just missed  the  mark.  His  aim,  however,  was  not  a  deliberate  one,  for the  target  was  only  a  pineapple,  and  he  had  no  interest  in  fixing  it. In  the  morning,  while  we  were  crossing  over  in  the  boat  to  Ross Island,  he  had  taken  a  much  more  accurate  aim  at  a  bird  flying  near us  and  which  he  probably  would  have  winged,  had  I  not  arrested  his aim  to  appease  the  alarm  of  one  of  our  party  who  feared  the  rocking of  the  boat  might  divert  the  shot  to  him.  It  was  interesting  to  watch the  intensity  with  which  the  eyes  of  this  savage  dilated,  and  his  eager jubilant  expression  as  he  calculated  his  aim  and  its  result,  but  on  the present  occasion  the  mark  had  not  the  same  interest,  nor  was  similar eagerness  evinced.  My  object  in  inducing  him  to  try  the  feat  was  to ascertain  correctly  the  distance  which  the  missile  would  carry. Mr.  Jones  next  tried  it,  but  was  unable  to  strike  with  it  beyond  a  few feet.  It  seems  to  require  long  practice  and  skill  of  touch  to  use  the bow  and  arrow  as  the  Andamanese  can  use  them.  After  this  per- formance, we  examined  some  nets  which  were  being  made  for the  Settlement,  and  then  went  through  the  married  village ;  the women  were  all  eager  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  the  aborigines,  but  in. nervous  dread  of  encountering  them,  which,  when  Joe  observed,  with his  usual  pleasantry,  he  took  advantage  of  to  chase  and  terrify  them, as  they  ran  in  all  directions,  into  their  houses.  The  Andamanese wished  to  carry  away  with  them  some  native  children,  making  signs, by  tender  endearments,  that  they  would  treat  them  well  and  kindly.
Mr.  Jones  now  brought  some  muskets  and  pistols  and  shewed  the  An- damanese their  effects  on  birds  and  trunks  of  trees.   They  were  alarmed
392
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
and  ran  to  me  for  protection,  hiding  themselves  behind  me  and  suppli- cating my  assistance.  Tallowed  a  few  shots  to  be  fired,  which  I  hoped would  produce  a  wholesome  impression  of  our  power  and  means  of deadly  destruction.  Some  elephants  were  next  brought,  at  the  sight  o? which  the  Andamanese  were  completely  terrified,  running  away  from them  and  climbing  up  trees  and  hiding  behind  rocks.  The  elephants were  made  to  lift  logs  of  wood  and  fling  them  across  a  road,  at  which  the Andamanese  shouted  their  astonishment ;  they  were  amazed  and  sur- prised to  S3e  the  docility  with  which  the  huge  elephant,  King  John, obeyed  the  order  to  roar,  when  its  trunk  was  struck.  Mr.  Jones  then brought  the  great  animal  on  its  haunches  and  mounted  it ;  and  Joe and  Jacko  were  afterwards  induced  to  do  so  also,  but  as  soon  as  it again  rested  they  quickly  alighted  with  a  roar  of  delight  at  being safely  deposited.  I  can  perceive,  by  the  signs  made  by  the  other savages,  that  they  have  been  describing  to  their  tribes  all  these strange  adventures,  which  it  is  to  be  hoped  may  have  the  effect  of striking  awe  into  them,  and  restraining  them  from  molesting  us.
Mr.  Jones  now  observed  to  me  that  there  was  on  the  shore  of  a fresh  water  creek,  opposite  Chatham,  a  very  unfriendly  tribe  of  abori- gines, and  that  he  had  seen  a  huge  fire  burning  in  their  camp  the night  before.  I  had  also  seen  it.  Mr.  Jones  said  that  this  tribe showed  great  hostility  to  us,  and  at  different  times  had  killed  many convicts ;  that  our  people  never  approached  their  shore  without  being shot  at.  I  at  once  proposed  to  take  my  Audamanese  friends  with presents  of  fruit  and  try  the  effect  on  the  other  tribe  of  friendly  over- tures. I  accordingly  proceeded  with  my  armed  party,  and  Mr.  Jones in  another  boat  also  with  an  armed  party.  We  rested  on  our  oars about  100  yards  from  the  shore,  where  the  smoke  of  their  fire  could be  seen.  Three  of  the  savages  peeped  from  under  the  bush,  but  came no  further.  I  threw  out  some  fruit,  which  floated.  Our  Andamanese shouted  to  the  others  in  their  own  language,  holding  up  bunches  of plantains,  but  to  no  purpose.  After  remaining  there  for  about  half an  hour,  and  using  every  inducement  we  could  by  signs  and  gestures, we  left ;  and  I  afterwards  heard  that  on  the  following  day  the  tribe struck  their  camp  which  had  been  there  for  many  months,  and  have
WITH  THE  ANDAMASESE.
393
abandoned  the  place  altogether.  "We  next  went  on  to  Chatham  Island and  visited  the  5  H.  P.  Saw  Mill.  The  noise  of  machinery  and sight  of  volumes  of  smoke  greatly  frightened  the  aborigines.  They looked  curiously  at  the  process  of  cutting  wood,  but  could  not  be persuaded  to  go  near  the  steam  funnel,  which  they  probably  looked upon  as  some  huge  instrument  of  destruction.
I  again  visited  North  Point  on  Friday,  the  26th  June.  Colonel Tytler  kindly  leut  bis  boat  and  sent  with  me  a  crew  of  the  Naval  Bri- gade. Joe  accompanied  us  as  guide,  and  we  took  to  the  savages  the usual  presents  of  fruits,  yams,  and  biscuits.  Only  three  women  could be  seen  on  the  North  Point,  one  of  them  being  the  ferocious  old woman  who  has  been  described  as  evincing  towards  us  cannibal  pro- pensities. She  came  out  to  meet  us,  and  to  our  surprise  seated  her- self in  the  boat  and  made  signs  to  take  her  to  Ross  Island.  I  directed Conner  to  steer  further  northward,  and  we  landed  at  Middle  Camp, where  no  aborigines  were  visible.  Three  sailors  were  left  with  strict orders  not  to  allow  Joe  and  the  old  woman,  whom  they  called "  Mamma, "  to  escape  from  the  boat ;  neither  of  them,  however, during  the  long  interval  of  our  absence,  showed  a  disposition  to  do  so. We  walked  along  the  shore  to  the  chief  coast  camp,  where  we  met some  aborigines,  an  old  man  supposed  to  be  the  husband  of  "  Mamma," the  man  known  as  Crusoe,  who  was  formerly  taken  as  a  hostage  to Moulmein,  and  a  few  others.  After  a  short  stay  there,  during  which no  incident  of  interest  happened,  we  returned  and  they  voluntarily accompanied  us.  "We  found  on  our  return  to  our  boat  another  Anda- manese,  whom  I  had  not  seen  before,  who  had  been  attracted  by  Joe's shouts  of  "  Mio,  "  "  Rogo.  "  Immediately  that  we  embarked  the  old man  and  Crusoe  made  an  attempt  to  seize  our  bags  of  provisions  and were  preparing  to  spring  with  them  into  the  water,  when  I  seized  both of  them  with  a  strong  grip  by  their  necks  and  held  them  down.  The old  woman,  taking  advantage  of  the  scuffle,  and  the  confusion  of  the sailors  in  a  strong  surf  driving  us  on  the  beach,  jumped  intc  the  water with  a  bunch  of  plantains,  but  Conner  at  my  orders  brought  her forcibly  back  again  much  to  her  disgust.  (Mr.  Corbyn  showed  great tact  and  discretion  in  his  actions  with  them.  In  thus  firmly  restrain-
3  B
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
ing  them,  without  showing   resentment  or   punishing   them,   he   did exactly  right.—  M.  F.  P.)
On  the  arrival  of  these  eight  new  comers  on  Ross  Island  occurred
the  scene  which  I  have  already  described  of  the  peaceful  assemblage
of   28   of  the  aborigines  at  the  Andaman  Home.     During  the  day  a
pig  was  given  to  them  by  Colonel  Tytler,  which  it  was  intended  they
should  share  ;  but  the  new  party,   who  belonged,  it  would  seem,  to  a
separate  tribe,  and  who  occupied,  while  they  were  here,  a  separate  hut
in  the  Andaman  Home,  appropriated  the  pig,  and  none  of  the  others
disputed  their   claim,  but  quietly  looked  on  at  their  preparations  for
the  repast    from    an  opposite  machan.     I  invited   all  to  share  the
feast,  but   Snowball  and  Jumbo's  party  resolutely  held  aloof.     Jingo
at  my  order  killed  the  pig,  but  immediately  that  he  had  done  so  left
it  to  the  new  comers,  who,  as  subsequent  circumstances  convinced  me
belonged  to  a  more  powerful  and  superior  tribe.     (They  belonged  to
another  Sept  of  the  same  Tribe.  —  M.   V.  P.)    I  also  noticed  that  the
wailing  that  had  hitherto  always  taken  place   between  the  prisoners
and  new  aborigines  visiting  them  was  not  attempted  on  the  arrival  of
the  last  batch  of  savages  ;  indeed  there  hardly  passed  between  them  the
common  signs  of  recognition.     Snowball,  Jumbo,  and  Topsy  withdrew
to  a  distance,  as  if  purposely  to  avoid  them,  and  the  old  woman,  as
soon  as  she  entered   their  hut,  stationed   herself   behind  a   post,   and
looked  stealthily  and  suspiciously  both  at  us  and  our  guests,  the
other    aborigines.      The   day's   festivities    and   the  perfect  security
they  enjoyed  appeared   to  have   a  mollifying  effect  on  all,  especially
on   the  old  woman   whom    Colonel  and   Mrs.   Tytler  were  surprised
to  find,  after   my   description,  so   timid   and   docile.     All  the   party
except   Topsy  and  Jingo,  who  refused  to  leave  the  island,   were  des-
patched in  a  boat  the  same  evening  and  safely  landed  at  North  Point.
I  should  mention  that  one   Andamanese   among    the   last  batch  was
identified   as   the  man  who,  some   months  ago,  on  the  mainland,  had
gashed  the  hand  of  a  convict  named  David,  for  his  (David's)    refusal
to   yield  up  his   umbrella,     David,   wher.  he  saw  him  here,  went  up
to  him  and  patted  him  on  his  cheek,  while  he  was   in  full  enjoyment
of   his   feast  ;    but  the  savage  did  not  recognise  him  or  pretended  not
WITH  THE  AN  DAMAN  ESfi.  395
to  recognise  him.  As  soon  as  Crusoe  and  his  party  had  left  the  com- pound, all  who  remained  behind  with  Snowball  and  Jumbo  rushed  to the  place  where  the  others  had  been  feasting  and  ravenously  gathered up  and  devoured  the  remnants  of  the  pig  left.  The  man  Crusoe  has a  gap  in  his  front  row  of  teeth,  two  of  them  having  been  knocked out,  for  some  real  or  supposed  provocation,  by  a  sailor  who  had charge  of  him  on  the  voyage  from  Moulmein  !.
I  brought  back  from  my  visit  to  the  chief  camp  on  the  26th  a painted  human  skull  ornamented  with  beads,  and  many  tortoise-shells of  a  rare  species  which  were  found  lying  in  or  near  the  aboriginal huts.  They  showed  reluctance  to  part  with  the  human  skull,  pro- bably of  a  chief,  and  tried  to  recover  it,  but  being  required  by  Colo- nel Tytler  to  be  sent  to  the  Ethnological  Society,  for  scientific  pur- poses, I  persuaded  them  to  let  me  retain  it.  The  next  morning, Saturday,  the  27th  ultimo,  I  took  over  to  North  Point  Topsy  and Jingo,  determined  to  let  the  aborigines  see  that  none  of  them,  except Snowball  and  Jumbo,  were  detained  here  against  their  will.  Mr. Kitton,  the  Second  Officer  of  the  Lady  Canning,  Mr.  Green,  merchant, and  some  other  Europeans,  with  a  Native  crew  composed  our  party. Most  of  us  landed.  Jingo  being  ill  was  at  once  taken  to  the  hut where  he  threw  himself  down  near  the  fire.  Topsy  went  to  paint  her- self ;  all  the  other  aborigines  sat  laughing  and  talking  without  the least  symptom  of  distrust  or  alarm  at  our  presence.  With  an  axe and  knives  we  cut  a  pathway  up  the  hill.  We  had  with  us  an Abyssinian,  a  stoker  of  the  steamer  Lady  Canning,  as  black  as  the aborigines,  with  whom  he  at  once  fraternised;  he  was  very  useful  to us  in  clearing  the  brushwood  and  directing  our  way  through  the jungle.
On  the  top  of  North  Point  Hill  we  came  to  table  land,  which  the Abyssinian,  who  climbed  up  a  tree  on  the  hill,  described  as  being  a mile  in  length.  It  was  covered  with  most  luxuriant  vegetation  and trees  of  huge  growth  and  size.  A  more  commanding  position  to  pro- tect this  Settlement  cannot  be  imagined,  nor  is  there  in  the  whole harbour  a  more  useful  and  important  point.  At  present  we  do  not hold  a  single  point  on  the  whole  line  of  coast,  from  North  Point  up-
396  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
ward?,  which  to  the  very  skirt  of  the  sea  is  covered  with  dense  jungle, in  which  treacherous  savages  may  conceal  themselves,  and  small boats  belonging  to  the  Settlement  driven,  as  may  often  happen,  by stress  of  weather,  on  those  rocks,  are  at  the  mercy  of  an  ignorant  and barbarous  race,  who  may  or  may  not  continue  friendly  to  us.  There is  good  reason,  from  what  we  have  seen,  to  believe  that  while  we  re- tain hostages  they  will  abstain  from  acts  of  cruelty  and  bloodshed, but  there  is  equal  reason  to  suppose  that  if  any  of  our  people  were  by some  accident  to  be  thrown  on  their  coast  they  would  retaliate,  and by  a  forced  captivity  of  Natives  or  Europeans  compel  the  surrender of  the  prisoners  whom  we  have  captured.
A.  gun  of  large  calibre  on  the  hill  of  North  Point  would  com- mand the  whole  harbour,  and  the  very  sound  of  it  and  the  knowledge of  its  proximity  would  terrify  the  savages  for  miles  around,  and  keep them  in  quiet  submission  or  drive  them  into  distant  recesses.  There is  every  probability  that  they  will  now  gradually  be  brought  to  culti- vate a  friendly  intercourse  with  us,  and  this  might  be  greatly  pro- moted by  having  a  Settlement  near  them  and  not  divided  by  the  sea, to  which  they  could  resort  with  such  articles  of  food  as  they  procure in  plenty,  to  exchange  for  other  merchandise.  We  yet  know  little  of their  habits,  but  their  sleek  and  full-bodied  appearance  testifies  that, whatever  their  food,  they  have  it  in  abundance.  As  to  apprehensions of  attacks  on  a  Settlement  at  North  Point,  I  believe  they  are  utterly visionary.  The  savages  have  conceived  such  an  exaggerated  estimate of  our  capabilities  of  destruction,  that  twenty  armed  Natives  or Europeans  would  put  to  instant  flight  a  thousand  of  them,  even assuming  that  they  were  not  deterred  from  attacking  us  by  fear  of the  wide-spread  havoc  we  could  carry  into  their  homes,  the  slaughter of  their  wives  and  children  !.  I  can  understand  that  they  might  be tempted  to  prowl  about  our  posts  for  plunder,  but  the  first  shot  fired would  drive  them  in  wild  terror  into  their  jungles.
They  imagine  that  we  have  infinite  appliances  of  destruction. Colonel  Tytler  showed  them  one  day  a  small  pocket  revolver  with which  he  fired  six  bullets  into  a  tree,  and  I  felt  some  of  them  quake
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  397
with  fear  when  they  saw  the  dangerous  and  destructive  effect  of  the tiny  instrument.
They  believe  that  I  can  kill  them  with  a  pistol -cap  ;  and  if  I  point one  at  them,  they  implore  me  to  desist,  or  at  once  jump  out  of  the way  in  dread  of  what  they  suppose  to  be  a  deadly  missile.
On  our  return  to  our  boat  we  found  Topsy  and  Bess  and  other Andamanese  women  and  children  seated  there.  I  tried  to  remove Topsy,  but  she  resolutely  kept  her  seat,  even  struggling  not  to  be  left behind ;  so  we  yielded  to  her  wish,  and  indeed  were  only  too  glad  to bring  her  back  again.  She  laughed  at  her  desire  to  baffle  us  in  get- ting herself  painted  at  their  hut,  for  she  and  the  other  savages  are  no longer  allowed  to  paint  and  tattoo  themselves  on  Ross  Island.  Colo- nel Tytler  very  properly  considering  this  a  degrading  and  barbarous practice,  has  prohibited  it.
(He  was  wrong.  At  that  period  their  customs  should  not  have been  interfered  with ;  and  the  painting  is  a  substitute  for  clothing, to  leave  off  which  exposes  them  to  chills. — M.  P.  P.)
I  have  yet  to  describe  our  last  expedition  to  the  mainland.  Last Monday  morning,  the  29th  of  June,  three  boats  sailed  from  Ross  for the  mainland,  carrying  the  Superintendent's  crew  of  13  armed  Naval Brigadesmen,  12  Sappers  and  Miners,  and  many  other  Europeans  and Natives.  Colonel  Tytler  entrusted  the  conduct  of  the  proceedings  to me.
A  pig  and  presents  of  plantains  and  biscuits  were  taken  for  the savages.  As  the  cutter  passed  North  Point  the  aborigines  came  run- ning to  the  shore  to  meet  us  ;  but  seeing  that  our  course  lay  north- ward, they  followed  us  along  the  coast  in  the  direction  of  their  chief camp.
Our  cutter  sailed  far  ahead  of  the  other  two  boats  which  were rowed  by  Natives.  We  arrived  about  half  an  hour  before  them  at the  camp,  where  we  landed.  The  place  seemed  quite  deserted,  not even  a  single  Andamanese,  as  we  have  usually  found,  keeping  watch to  give  notice  of  our  approach.  One  by  one,  however,  the  fastest runners  who  had  been  following  us  along  the  rocks,  came  up  to  the chief  camp,  and  before  the  sepoys  had  landed  there  were  about  thirty
398
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
savages  scattered  over  the  beach.     We  all  breakfasted  hastily,  and while  we  were  doing  so  the  Andamanese  crowded  round  us,  looking •wistfully  at  our  food,  and  by  stealth  or  entreaty  getting  what  they could  ;  so  importunate  did  they  become,  that  I  was  obliged  to  place Sepoys  round  me  to  guard  my  food.    At  the  sight  of  some  broiled bacon  put  before  me  they  gave  a  tumultuous  yell,  and  all  danced shouting  and  waving  their  arms  in  a  circle  round  me.     The  sailors and  others  most  liberally  distributed  their  food ;  in  fact  the  poor  men •went  almost  without  their  meals  through  the  rapacity  of  the  savages ; the  latter  might  be  seen  running  like  a  pack  of  hungry  dogs  from one  group  to  another  wherever  most  food  tempted  them.     One  of  the sailors  lent  my  pruning  knife  to  a  savage  who  begged  the  loan  of  it for  some  purpose ;  and  as  soon  as  the  sailor  had  turned  his  attention to  some  other  matter  went  off  and  concealed  it.    On  being  asked  for it,  he  at  first  pretended  to  have  lost  it,  but  seeing  our  firm  determina- tion to  recover  it,  he  took  us  to  a  tree  and  disinterred  it  from  the trunk.     We  now  proceeded  on  our  journey  into  the  interior,  our object  being  to  discover  their  chief  inland  camp.     I  gave  directions to  Conner  to  leave  two  sailors  in  the  cutter  with  strict  orders  to  re- main there,  and  to  keep  their  own  and  the  other  two  boats  at  some distance  from  the  shore.     I  also  directed  two  other  sailors  and  two Sepoys  to  remain  on  the  beach  in  charge  of  the  muskets  of  the  other ten  Sappers  and  Miners,  who  might,  in  the  event  of  a  disturbance require  their  muskets,  but  could  not  conveniently  carry  them,  as  they were  marching  through  the  jungle  felling  wood  with  their  axes.     I ordered  the  two  sailors  left  on  the  beach  to  fire  a  pistol,  the  report  of which  would   warn  us  in   case  of  any  untoward  occurrence.     I  im- pressed strongly  on  all  the  party  who  accompanied  me  the  necessity of  keeping  close  together,  with  a  watchful  eye  on  all  sides  of  the jungle.     I  also  directed  our  party  to  take   each   an  Andamanese   by the  hand,  and  to  take  the  utmost  care  that  none  of  them  escaped  even if  we  were  attacked,  as  they  would  be  useful  as  hostages  and  ensure our  safety.     We  made  the  Andamanese  carry  the  pig  and  plantains, which  we  promised  them  as  a  reward  at  the  end  of  the  journey.     We carried  with  us  a  bag  of  biscuits,  from  which  we  kept  feeding  them
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  399
all  along  the  road  ;  and  when  we  had  proceeded  about  three  miles,  to avoid  irritating  them,  we  relieved  them  of  their  weights  of  plantains and  the  pig,  which  we  made  our  servants  carry.  We  followed  their inland  road ;  two  sailors  with  half-cooked  muskets  going  on  in  front and  the  Sappers  and  Miners  following  them  cutting  so  vigorously, that  a  really  good  road  was  formed  through  the  narrowest  part  of which  four  or  five  could  march  abreast.  One  of  the  savages  caused me  much  annoyance ;  he  was  under  charge  of  Mr.  Kitton,  who  found much  difficulty  in  managing  him  and  preventing  his  escape,  that  I took  him  under  my  care,  and  holding  him  tightly  by  the  hind  made him  walk  along  with  me.  The  aboriginal  road  brought  us  to  a stream  about  fifteen  yards  wide,  which  I  suppose  is  dry  in  all  but rainy  weather.  The  aborigines  wished  us  to  take  a  southerly  direc- tion, pointing  to  their  camp;  but  suspecting  that  they  might  be wishing  to  mislead,  I  preferred  to  follow  the  course  of  the  stream which  I  intended,  if  possible,  to  trace  to  its  source.  This  was  dis- covered about  four  miles  in  the  interior,  the  water,  gushing  from  a hill  above,  which  we  determined  to  ascend.  As  we  walked  through the  stream,  the  Andamanese  with  me  stopped  to  lift  rocks  in  the  water, and  as  my  curiosity  was  excited  by  the  eager  way  in  which  he  did  so I  called  natives  to  assist  him,  and  to  our  surprise  he  pulled  out  from under  the  rocks  large  fresh  water  prawns,  which  he  eat  just  as  they were  entire.  This  man,  about  a  mile  from  the  top  of  the  hill,  sud- denly snatched  his  hand  out  of  mine,  with  a  force  which  almost flung  me  on  the  ground,  and  plunged  into  the  woods,  shouting  loudly as  he  went.  Some  of  our  party  chased  him,  but  I  immediately  gave the  alarm  and  summoned  all  together,  cautioning  all  to  hold  iu  a firmer  grasp  the  other  hostages.  Tha  man  who  had  escaped  had  a most  revolting  cast  of  countenance,  every  typa  of  villainy  stamped on  his  face,  and  it  was  quite  possible  that  he  might  be  up  to  mischief. I  declared  my  intention  to  seize  him  if  I  again  saw  him.  I  then  took Jacko,  who  was  just  behind  me,  by  the  hand  and  explained  to  him that  if  any  of  us  were  shot  at  he  should  suffer  instant  death.  We soon  after  reached  the  top  of  the  hill  from  which  we  caught  a glimpse  of  the  ocean.  An  effort  was  made  to  climb  one  of  the  highest
400  A  HISTORY  OF  OTTR  RELATIONS
trees,  but  ifc  failed  for  want  of  proper  ropes  and  ladders.  We  marched that  day  through  the  jungles  at  least  five  miles,  and  formed  a  road  of that  length,  which  I  should  think  will  greatly  astonish  the  savages. Each  side  of  it  was  left  densely  covered  with  the  boughs  of  trees  and brushwood  which  had  been  cut  down  in  our  march.  With  such laborious  manual  exertions,  and  the  fatigue  attending  them,  it  was clearly  impossible  to  make  any  observations  as  to  the  character  of  the country  and  products ;  but  we  have  at  least  rendered  facilities  for others  who  may  follow  us,  and  it  is  something  to-  say  that  we  have been  five  miles  into  the  interior  of  these  jungles  into  which  no European  perhaps  penetrated  as  many  yards  before.  We  left  our mark  on  a  tree  on  the  top  of  the  hill.  On  returning,  we  met  the savage  who  had  escaped,  and  taking  him  by  the  hand  I  quietly brought  him  back  to  the  camp  again,  and  took  no  other  notice  of  hi» conduct.
As  we  were  returning,  about  a  mile  from  the  camp,  a  sailor  with his  musket  on  his  shoulder  was  going  first  and  I  was  next  to  him, when  in  an  instant  a  savage  sprang  from  behind  a  tree  with  a  loud yell  and  seized  the  sailor  by  the  neck  ;  then  threw  his  arms  round  him clasping  him  firmly  musket  and  all,  and  looking  him  in  the  face  gave a  loud  laugh  as  much  as  to  say  "  what  a  fright  I  have  given  you  ; "you  see  how  we  savages  can  spring  on  an  enemy  from  the  bush." The  poor  sailor  was  taken  quite  aghast,  but  quickly  re -assured  when he  saw  it  was  playful  Joe,  with  whose  pranks  they  are  all  familiar.
(This  is  the  first  recorded  ascent  of  Mount  Harriett. — M.  V.  P.)
Numbers  of  the  aborigines,  apparently  of  different  tribes,  joined us  from  all  parts  of  the  jungle  on  our  way  back.  We  could  eveu  see them  on  the  tops  of  trees  watching  our  movements.  They  seemed quite  re-assured  at  seeing  us  come  back  peaceably  without  doing  them any  injury.
I  have  now,  however,  to  turn  to  a  more  unfavourable  aspect  of the  day's  business.  When  we  brought  back  the  pig  I  gave  niy  dagger to  Joe  and  told  him  to  cut  the  pig  in  two,  keeping  half  for  his  tribe and  giving  the  rest  to  the  other  tribe  dwelling  at  the  chief  camp. Joe  took  the  dagger  and  began  to  cut  the  pig.  I  walked  to  the  sea
W  1TH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  401
to  brush  off  the  leeches  with  which  my  legs  were  covered.  On  iny return  Joe  had  given  up  the  pig  to  Crusoe  who  was  roasting  it  over a  fire.  Joe  himself  was  seated  on  a  trunk  of  a  tree  watching  the  pro- ceedings. When  I  asked  for  my  dagger  he  pretended  not  to  remem- ber where  he  had  placed  it ;  then  made  other  excuses  that  some  one else  had  taken  it ;  then  pretended  that  he  had  concealed  it,  and  would bring  it  hack,  and  wished  to  go  and  look  for  it  in  the  jungle.  The other  savages  came  to  intercede  and  make  excuses.  I  held  Joe  firmly and  demanded  instant  restitution  of  my  property.  It,  was  not  that  I in  the  least  valued  my  dagger,  for  I  would  give  much  to  preserve  a good  understanding  with  the  aborigines  ;  but  having  witnessed  their grasping  disposition  in  the  morning,  and  feeling  that  it  was  incom- patible with  the  maintenance  of  a  friendly  intercourse,  that  Natives especially  Avould  never  in  their  relations  with  these  savages  tolerate such  barbarous  infringement  of  their  rights,  I  determined  to  check  it at  the  outset,  and  therefore  to  make  an  example  of  Joe,  if  the  dagger- was  not  produced.  The  savages  seeing  my  resolution  and  the  change which  had  come  over  the  scene,  as  both  Europeans  and  Natives  had orders  to  make  preparations  to  embark  if  the  dagger  was  not  soon given  up,  began  gradually  to  disperse  till  only  Crusoe  and  one  or  two others  of  the  less  timid  ones  were  left  on  the  beach.  I  told  the  Sepoys and  Natives  that  there  was  likely  to  be  a  disturbance  with  the  abori- gines and  ordered  them  to  embark,  an  order  which  they  obeyed  with alacrity.  I  then  ordered  the  sailors  into  the  cutter,  and  just  as  all  the boats  were  ready  to  start,  with  another  European  I  seized  Joe,  and forcibly  putting  him  into  the  boat  shoved  out  and  all  set  oil  toge- ther. We  also  carried  away  the  pig  and  all  the  plantains.  Not  a single  shct  had  been  fired  the  whole  day  either  in  jest  or  earnest,  and there  was  nothing  but  this  unhappy  affair  to  mar  the  pleasure  of  the excursion.  Joe  wanted  us  to  go  near  North  Point  assuring  us  that the  dagger  would  be  given  up  there.  We  did  so.  At  least  a  hundred savages  must  have  been  at  the  Point ;  they  offered  us  bows  and arrows  which  we  refused,  and  then  they  made  signs  that  they  would bring  the  dagger.  We  returned  to  Ross  and  reported  all  the  circum- stances to  Colonel  Tytler.  Joe  was  placed  during  the  night  between
3   F
A  HISTORY  OF  OUE  RELATIONS
two  natives  as  a  guard  in  a  separate  hut  in  the  Andaman  Home,  but not  before  he  had  time  to  explain  to  all  the  other  aborigines  there what  had  happened.  Topsy  assured  me  that  if  I  took  her  over  in  the morning  she  would  bring  the  dagger.  I,  therefore,  did  so  ;  but  as  the savages,  instead  of  the  dagger,  brought  only  bows  and  arrows,  I  left Topsy  and  returned.  I  felt  confident  that  the  dagger  would  be  given tip,  but  it  seemed  an  admirable  opportunity  to  teach  Joe  and  the others  a  lesson  in  equity  and  moral  justice  for  their  future  good  beha- viour. He  was,  therefore,  by  Colonel  Tytler's  orders  put  into  fetters  ; but  as  he  tried,  either  in  play  or  earnest,  to  strike  the  carpenter  who was  fastening  them,  his  hands  were  also  tied  behind  him,  but  this part  of  the  punishment  was  remitted  about  an  hour  after.  About noon,  I  again  went  for  Topsy.  There  were  now  very  few  to  be  seen on  the  beach,  but  through  a  telescope  we  could  see  Jacko  flourishing my  dagger;  when  we  approached  nearer  he  swam  out  and  delivered it  up  to  me,  and  then  "Topsy  "  and  other  women  and  children  came into  the  boat  and  returned  with  us  to  Ross  Island.  I  kept  them  all with  me  on  the  shore  till  I  had  sent  for  the  ironsmith,  who  accom- panied me  to  the  Andaman  Home  and  struck  off  the  fetters  from  Joe before  them  all,  while  I  held  the  dagger  before  Joe  to  show  him  that his  purloining  had  been  the  cause  of  his  imprisonment,  and  that  the restitution  of  it  now  was  the  cause  of  his  release.  The  good  results of  this  firm  treatment  of  the  aborigines  has  already  become  appa- rent.
I  have  been  to  North  Point,  and  amongst  the  Andatnauese,  since the  occurrences  above  related,  and  the  good  understanding  with  them which  was  temporarily  suspended,  is  quite  restored.
(Mr.  Corbyn's  conduct  in  the  above  affair  of  the  dagger  was  per- fectly correct.  —  M.  P.  P.)
On  this  narrative  the  Government  of  India  remark  that  they  have read  it  with  great  interest,  and  will  be  glad  to  hear  from  time  to  time reports  of  the  further  progress,  made  by  the  meritorious  exertions  of the  Reverend  Mr.  Corbyn,  towards  establishing  friendly  relations  with the  Andamanese,  and  obtaining  any  real  a/nd  reliable  information  as»
WITH  THE  ANDAMANE8E.  403
to  their  numbers,  and  as  to  the  existence  of  any  chief  or  chiefs  by whom  authority  is  exercised  among  them.
Great  caution  was,  however,  to  be  observed  in  sending  exploring expeditions  into  the  interior.  The  expedition,  as  related  by  Mr Oorbyn,  seems  to  have  subjected  a  small  and  comparatively  helpless party  to  the  risk  of  being  attacked  by  an  overwhelming  number  of natives,  and  the  arrangements  made  for  the  protection  of  the  arms left  on  the  beach  were  of  questionable  sufficiency  had  any  attack  on the  guard  been  made.
An  allowance  of  one  hundred  rupees  per  mensem  was  sanctioned for  the  Andaman  Home.  A  ticket-of-leave  convict  named  J.  Peterson was  in  charge  of  this  Home  under  Mr.  Corbyn,  and  seems  to  have gained  the  affection  of  the  Andamanese,  and  to  have  done  good  work.
404  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
CHAPTER  XL
Narrative  No.  2,  by  Mr.  Corbyn,  •with  notes — His  CTpeditions  into  the  interior  with the  Andamanese,  and  his  gradual  taming  of  them — Naval  Brigadesmen  in  trouble at  Chiriya  Tapu— Children  taught— Habits  of  the  Andamancse — Stories  of Andamanese  kidnapped,  etc. — Sir  Robert  Napier's  visit  to  the  Andamans.
THE  release  of  Joe  inspired  the  other  two  captives,  Jumbo  and Snowball,  with  hopes  of  liberation  for  which  they  now  renewed their  entreaties.
Last   Saturday    (the  4th   July,  1863),  an  untoward  circumstance again  made  it  necessary  for  me  to  visit  the    mainland.     Two    escaped convicts  were  brought  to  Ross,  who  had  been  ill-treated  and  shot  at  by the  aborigines,  and  one  of  them  so  badly   wounded  that  no  hope    was entertained   of   his  recovery.     Soon  after  the  death  of  Pratt,  a  man  of the  Naval  Brigade  who  had  been  killed   by   the  aborigines,   acts  of cruel  hostility   to   the   Settlement  on  the  part   of  the  latter  were  of almost  daily  occurrence.     (This  seems  to  be  an  exaggeration  ;  no  such acts  are  mentioned  in  Colonel  Tytler's  reports — M.  V.  P.);  but  since  the imprisonment    of  Snowball  and  Jumbo,  and  the  friendly  visits  of  the tribe,  they    had  almost  or  altogether   ceased.     It,   therefore,   caused much   surprise   when  the   two   convicts   Nahser   and   Davy   appear- ed here,  one  with   bruises   and   a    slight   wound   in  the   right   side and   the   other   with   a   severe  and  almost  mortal  wound  in  the  head, alleged  to  have  been  made  by  arrows  shot   at   them   by   Andamanese supposed  to  be  on   friendly   terms  with  us.     Their  account  was  that they  had  escaped  from   Aberdeen   and   gone  on  by  Haddo   beyond Viper,  whence  they  floated  on  a  raft  to  the  opposite  coast,  and  walked round  North  Point  to  a  place,  which,  by  their  description,  must  have been  Chief  Camp,  where  they  met  many   of   the   aborigines.     They said  that   the   savages  at  North  Point  had  forcibly  deprived  them  of their  food,  and  others  at  Chief  Camp  had  seized   a  brass  vessel    from one   of  them  ;  that  on  Tuesday,  the  30t'i  of  June,  which  was  the  very day  after  our  visit  to  Chief  Camp,  and  the  same   day   on   which   the
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  405
dagger  was  delivered  up,  some  of  the  savages,  after  completely  de- nuding them,  wantonly  and  deliberately  shot  at  them ;  that  their imploring  gestures  and  frantic  supplications  to  them  to  desist  had  no effect  in  curbing  their  relentless  barbarity  ;  and  that  the  Andamanese women  looked  on  unmoved,  or  with  savage  delight,  at  the  cruelties practised  upon  them.
On  receiving  these  accounts  the  Superintendent  considered  it necessary  to  make  the  Andamanese  in  our  possession  (!)  understand that  such  acts  of  inhumanity  would  no  longer  be  tolerated ;  and  as I  had  before  succeeded  in  imparting  a  clear  impression  to  their minds,  which  led  to  the  recovery  of  my  dagger,  he  desired  me  now to  make  them  distinctly  understand  that  the  repetition  of  these cruelties  would  provoke  summary  retribution;  that  the  lives  of Natives  belonging  to  this  Settlement  were  to  be  as  much  respected as  the  lives  of  Europeans ;  and  that  we  were  determined  to  protest them.
(The  men  were  convicts  and  had  no  business  to  run  away.  Though the  savages  carried  their  treatment  of  them  too  far,  it  was  a  mistake to  avenge  the  ill-treatment  of  these  men  with  the  same  seventy  as if  they  had  been  free  Europeans  of  the  Settlement.  For  disciplinary reasons  it  waa  preferable  for  the  convicts  to  imagine  that  the  abori- gines would  always  ill-treat  and  murder  them,  as  it  would  check  their escapes — M.  V.  P.)
There  was  but  one  way  of  making  the  idea  intelligible  to  their minds,  and  that  method  I  adopted.  I  sent  for  Jumbo  and  his  wife Topsy,  and  for  Joe  and  Jacko.  I  took  them  towards  the  Native hospital.  I  had  a  bow  and  arrow  in  my  hand  and  also  an  unloaded pistol.  The  Native  who  was  slightly  wounded  was  with  me.  About halfway  to  the  hospital  from  a  hill  we  could  see  North  Point  and Chief  Camp.  I  called  their  attention  to  the  wound  on  the  body  of the  Native,  showed  them  with  the  bow  and  arrow  how  it  had  been inflicted,  and  then  pointed  to  their  camp,  telling  them  as  well  as  I could  in  disconnected  words  of  their  language  that  he  had  been  wounded by  their  tribe.  I  then  pointed  the  pistol  by  turns  at  Jumbo,  Joe,  and Jacko,  still  making  signs  to  them  that  their  clan  had  shot  the  Native,
405  A  HISTOHY  OF  OtTR  RELATIONS
and  by  my  angry  and  menacing  gestures   making   them   quake   with the  horrible  fear  that  their  lives  were  in  instant  peril.    Topsy  made frantic  gestures,  which  I  understood  to  imply  that  her  tribe  was   not at  fault,  that  it  was   another  tribe,  pointing  southward,  and  when  the Native   indicated  that  it    had  been  done  at   Chief   Camp,    she  still, assenting   to  what  he   said,   resolutely  pointed  southwards,  as  much as  to  say  that  it  had  been  done  beyond  North  Point,    but  by   one   of the   aborigines   belonging  to  the  Southern  Tribe.     She  also  made  un- mistakable   signs,   which   were  interpreted  in  that   view  by   other persons  present,  that  if  we  would  send  her  over,  she  would   bring   to us  the  man  who  had  shot  the  Native,  and  pointing  to  Jumbo's  chains made  us  understand  that  we  could  then  put   him   in   irons.     At   the hospital,   I  showed  them  the  man  who  had  been  so  severely  wounded, exhibiting  his  wound,  and  again  going  through    the  pantomime   des- cribed,  which  I  did   with  much  reluctance,  as  Jumbo  was  so  agita- ted with  fear  that  he   could  hardly   stand,   and  Topsy  covered   him with   her  body  to  shield  him  from  harm  ;  but  it  was  a  case  on  which human  life  depended  and  which   demanded   extreme  actions,   and   I felt  that    it   was  better  to  cause  momentary  terror  to  these  reckless and  ruthless  savages  than  any  longer  to  allow  the  lives  of  unoffending persons  to  be  exposed  to  their  cruel    caprices  and   brutal  love  of butchery.
By  Colonel  Tytler's  order  Topsy  was  taken  to  North  Point  the same  afternoon,  after  I  made  her  understand  that  she  was  expressly sent  to  detect  and  bring  back  the  perpetrators  of  the  crime.  With the  utmost  confidence  in  her  sagacity,  intelligence,  and  good  and friendly  disposition,  I  confess  that  I  entertained  no  hope  of  her  re- deeming her  promise,  which  was  unnatural  to  expect,  nor  that  any- thing could  prompt  her  to  such  treachery  but  the  superior  motive  of devotion  to  her  husband  and  alarm  for  his  safety.
The  arrival  next  day  of  the  steamer  Arracan  with  despatches from  Government  completely  changed  the  programme  of  proceedings and  compelled  the  adoption  of  a  different  line  of  action  with  regard to  the  aborigines.  Colonel  Tytler  having  received  orders  from Government  to  liberate  Snowball,  desired  me  on  Monday,  the  5th,  to
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  4Q7
take  across  and  land  him  on  the  mainland,  giving  him  on   his  arrival there   some   small  presents,  and  to  his  trihe  two  pigs  and  other  provi- sions to  celehrate  his  release.     We    accordingly   sailed   across  about noon   and    approached   the   coast   directly   opposite   Middle    Camp. On   our   way  to   it  we  passed  North  Point,  where  smoke  issued  from the  jungle,  and  two  Andamanese  were  seen,   but   held  timidly   aloof from   us.     As   we  entered  the  bay  opposite  their  camp,  some  of  them responded  to  our  calls  and  signalled  to  us   to   land,   while   the  Anda- manese  in   the   boat   held   up  fruit  and  invited  them  to  swim  to  us. We  could  see  crowds  of  aborigines  assembled   under   cover   of   thick bushes  on  the  beach;  they  had  apparently  come  down  in  large  masses, as  if  expecting  some  hostile  demonstration,  and  most  of  them  silently watched   us   at  a  secure   distance,   and  acted  as  they  always  do  when uncertain  of  our  temper  and  suspicious  of  our  designs.     They   were divided   into  two  large  bodies   separated  by  a  thick  clump  of  trees, those  on  the  left  or  south  side  were  chiefly  full   grown   and   athletic men    headed   by   Crusoe,   and  the  others   on  the  right,  apparently  a reserve  guard,  protecting  the  women  and  children  who  were  squatted in  dense  masses  under  newly-made  huts,  which   on   subsequent   in- spection were  found  to  form  the  largest   collective  camp  which  we have  yet  teen  on   the   coast.     Before   starting   I   had   directed  the coxswain  to  keep  out  our  cutter  at  a  greater  distance  than  usual  from the  shore,  as  I  had  anticipated  some  such  scene  as  we   now  witnessed betokening  distrust   and  alarm  on  the  part  of  the  savages,  in  conse- quence of  the  intimations  of  our  displeasure,  and  the  warnings  which I  had  expected  and  intended  should  be  conveyed  to  them  by  Topsy. Topsy  herself  was  amongst  the  crowd,  but  held  back,  or  was  probably kept  back  by  the  rest,   in  apprehension  of   some  disaster.     As  our mission  was  of  a  peaceful  and  friendly  character,  and  a  demonstration of  displeasure  could  no  longer  be  maintained   consistently   with   the object   in   view,   which  was  to  celebrate  with   suitable   rejoicing   the release  of  their  Chief,  Snowball,   we  did  our   utmost  to  allay   their alarm  bj    exhibiting  gifts  and  making  the  usual  signs  of  kind  inten- tions and  a  friendly   disposition   towards   them.     As   a  measure   of caution,   however,   before   distributing  the  presents,  I  called  to  them
A  HISTOKY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
to  swim  out  to  us  with  bows  and  arrows,  a  large  number  of  which were  collected,  and  would  have  been  delivered  to  the  Superintendent as  property  of  Government  had  they  not  been  appropriated  by  the sailors  before  I  had  time  to  secure  them,  as  soon  as  we  returned  to Ross  Island.
(The  Naval  Brigadesmen  seem  to  have  been  very  undisciplined, and  were  as  usual  troublesome  and  disorderly  —  M.  V.  P.)
The  squeaking  of  the  pigs  which  the  sailors  held  up  served  as  the best  bait  of  all  to  attract  the  savages.  They  shouted  and  danced wildly,  and  unable  to  resist  the  spell  plunged  through  the  surf  and soon  surrounded  the  boat,  throwing  in  their  bows  and  arrows,  and calling  "  Mio,"  "  Kogo,"  and  as  soon  as  they  were  in  the  boat  seized the  pigs  and  gloated  savagely  over  them.
To  our  surprise  the  news  of  Snowball's  release  and  his  presence in  the  boat  excited  no  general  sensation.  One  of  the  Andamanese, a  man  of  some  age,  whom  I  had  not  seen  before,  hugged  and  wailed over  him,  but  there  was  not  on  this  as  on  previous  occasions  a  chorus of  noisy  weepers  :  even  the  solitary  mourner,  as  soon  as  his  sorrow was  quenched,  appeared  to  forget  all  about  it,  and  wiping  away  the semblance  of  tears,  pounced  greedily  upon  a  bag  of  biscuits,  in  the process  of  lightening  which  he  shewed  an  appetite  truly  prodigious, and  which  had  apparently  not  suffered  from  recent  emotion,
(Mr.  Corbyn  does  not  seem  to  have  understood  that  there  was  no question  of  grief,  but  that  the  Andamanese  cry  when  meeting  after a  long  separation,  from  joy.  Further,  as  Snowball  had  been absent  for  long,  and  under  serious  circumstances,  it  was  not  etiquette for  the  general  body  of  the  Andamanese  to  cry  over  him  until  eome hours  after  his  arrival,  the  crying  when  once  started  probably  lasting all  night.—  M.  F.P.).
Though  Snowball's  return  produced  no  great  sensation,  a  few of  them  showed  great  tenderness  in  the  care  with  which  they  treated him,  nursing  him  in  their  arms  and  on  their  laps,  and  pinching  and pressing  his  side  to  ease  the  pain  from  which  he  was  suffering.  To make  certain  of  his  release,  they  were  preparing  to  stealthily  remove
WITH  THE  AKDAMANBSB.
and  carry  bim  from  tbe  boat ,  but  I  intercepted  tbeir  plans  as  soon as  I  observed  tbem  by  taking  hold  of  Snowball  and  keeping  bim  securely till  I  could  land  him  and  give  .him  up  myself,  without  yielding  to force  or  stratagem.  After  making  ineffectual  attempts  to  reach  the shore  at  Middle  Camp,  which  we  were  unable  to  do  on  account  of  the heavy  surf,  which  would  have  drenched  our  clothes  and  fire-arms,  we steered  towards  North  Point,  intending  to  land  at  a  temporary  camp which  they  had  formed  there,  and  made  signs  to  them  to  follow  us.
All  the  aborigines  whom  we  had  brought  from  Ross  had already  swum  ashore,  but  we  had  now  about  twelve  others  in  the  boat, some  of  whom,  as  soon  as  our  anchor  was  weighed,  jumped  over,  and the  rest  in  their  suspicion  were  almost  inclined  to  do  so,  but  remained probably  interested  in  Snowball's  fate,  and  probably  also  in  the  pigs and  provisions.  The  crowds  on  shore  at  first  refused  to  follow,  and sat  sullenly  on  the  beach,  as  before,  watching  our  movements  with suspicion.  But  the  squeaking  of  the  pigs  again  proved  irresistible, and  before  we  had  turned  North  Point  the  whole  coast  was  crowded, and  on  landing  we  were  surrounded  by  men,  women,  and  children,  all clamouring  for  the  food  we  brought  them,  and  so  eager  to  get  it  that it  required  the  utmost  vigilance  and  firmness  of  the  guard  to  prevent their  snatching  away  the  bags  before  they  were  even  landed.
Snowball's  friends  were  allowed  to  carry  him  on  shore,  and they  immediately  deposited  him  in  one  of  their  huts,  close  to  a smouldering  fire,  where  a  few  of  them  remained  rubbing  his  sides  and tending  him  with  much  care  and  kindness.  He  had  been  suffering for  some  days  from  a  low  fever  common  to  the  aborigines,  and  on  the previous  day  had  been  attended  by  the  Civil  Surgeon,  who  adminis- tered an  emetic,  and  afterwards  some  quinine  mixture,  which  had  a favourable  effect ;  and  we  hoped  that  his  release  and  return  to  his friends,  and  the  application  of  remedies  used  by  his  people,  and  to which  he  was  accustomed,  would  speedily  restore  his  health.  The young  shoots  of  the  mangrove,  which  are  bitter,  are  said  to  possess tonic  properties,  and  it  is  supposed  that  the  aborigines  use  them  when suffering  from  fever  or  other  debilitating  diseases.  (They  do  not  use them.— M.  V.  P.)
3  a
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
The  food  which  we  brought  absorbed  their  attention  to  the  exclu- sion of  Snowball  and  every  other  object.  Two  goats  which  had  died from  natural  causes,  and  which  the  aborigines  in  the  Home  refused  to eat,  had  been  brought,  and  were  devoured.  As  a  matter  of  economy, it  is  desirable  that  the  Andamanese  by  eating  them  should  relieve  the Settlement  of  defunct  cattle  and  other  refuse  commodities.
(They  are  usually  very  particular  about  eating  such  things. — M.  V.  P.)
It  was  a  satisfactory  sign  of  the  confidence  of  this  tribe  in  our clemency  and  good  faith  that  Snowball  was  not  immediately  carried to  a  place  of  concealment,  but  allowed  to  remain  in  the  hut  in  which they  had  placed  him  during  the  hour  or  two  that  we  were  on  shore watching  their  proceedings,  and  that  on  the  following  day,  when  we visited  them  at  Chief  Camp,  he  was  again  there,  and  no  disposition was  shewn  to  conceal  him  from  us,  or  to  remove  him  when  we landed.
The  Andamanese  mode  of  killing  pigs  has  been  so  often  described that  it  is  needless  to  repeat  the  description  here.  It  is  enough  to  say that,  as  we  refused  to  lend  them  knives,  they  used  a  piece  of  sharpened bamboo,  and  made  the  incision  on  the  right  side  of  the  throat,  and not  as  they  usually  do  through  the  heart  first  by  a  slit  with  a  piece of  glass  across  the  skin,  and  then  a  deep  thrust  into  the  vital  part with  a  sharp  pointed  prong  of  bamboo.
While  the  feast  was  proceeding  a  canoe  was  seen  approaching, and  soon  four  aborigines  came  up  with  bows  and  arrows,  which  they readily  gave  up  to  the  sailors.  They  seemed  to  be  of  another  tribe, of  somewhat  different  form  and  features,  and  their  chief,  a  man  of  fine appearance,  sturdy  and  erect,  and  taller  than  all  the  others.  Topsy pointed  to  him,  and  made  signs  to  me  to  bring  him  to  Ross  Island, which  I  understood  to  mean  that  he  was  the  person  who  had  been guilty  of  the  offence,  for  which  we  sent  her  to  warn  the  aborigines, of  shooting  at  the  escaped  convicts,  but  I  was  unwilling  to  take  ad- vantage of  that  occasion  for  his  forcible  arrest,  by  which  I  should again  have  awakened  their  alarm  and  suspicion,  and  especially  under such  doubtful  conjectures  of  his  guilt,  as  it  seemed  quite  possible
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
that  Topsy  might  wish  to  make  him  an  innocent  victim  to  screen  the real  offender.  I  hoped,  too,  that  even  if  her  information  proved correct,  some  other  more  favourable  opportunity  would  occur  to  de- tect and  apprehend  him.  I,  therefore,  merely  directed  the  sailors  to endeavour  to  coax  him  to  go  with  us,  not  pointedly,  nor  singly,  but in  company  with  others  ;  and  with  a  view  to  make  an  agreeable  im- pression on  the  chief  of  a  new  tribe,  I  showed  him  many  marks  of civility  and  kindness.  I  dissuaded  the  sailors  from  going  to  examine their  canoe,  in  order  to  avoid  everything  that  might  excite  their apprehension.  The  aborigines  might  be  induced  to  come  to  the Settlement  in  their  canoes  if  they  felt  that  these  were  safe,  and  that none  of  their  property  would  be  molested,  but  so  many  canoes  have been  taken  from  them  in  former  times,  that  they  are  now  afraid  to shew  them,  and  draw  them  up  creeks,  and  hide  them  in  the  jungles when  they  see  us  coming,  and  while  these  fears  last  our  visits  must always  occasion  them  inconvenience  and  anxiety.
I  consider  it  a  curious  circumstance  that  in  all  our  experience  of these  people  we  have  not  observed  a  single  instance  of  bickering  or disputing  between  them.  I  have  never  heard  a  cross  word  from  one Andamanese  to  another,  nor  seen  a  movement  of  the  countenance which  would  indicate  anger  or  displeasure  of  one  towards  another. If  one  asks  anything  of  another  it  is  at  once  yielded,  either  as  if  there was  an  understood  reason  for  the  request,  or  that  it  was  backed  by force  of  acknowledged  and  indisputable  authority.  Whatever  their form  of  government  and  the  internal  economy  of  their  arrangements there  is  a  most  perfect  subordination  of  all  to  some  head  or  controll- ing power,  and  an  order  prevails  which  can  be  the  result  only  of  a system  of  prescribed  rules,  and  which  shows  that  they  are  not  want- ing in  method  and  organization.
(The  system  is  a  real  communism,  and  the  governing  power  is  the general  fear  of  the  resentment  of  the  other,  which  would  lead  him  to commit  murder. — M.  V.  P.)
The  Andamanese,  Crusoe,  is  always  the  most  busy  and  energetic, and,  if  possible,  the  most  grasping.  He  prepared  the  repast,  saw  to the  cleaning  and  cooking  of  the  pigs  and  goats,  and  appropriated  the
3o  2
412
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR
largest  share  of  choicest  pieces.  He  has  a  harsh  hut  stentorian  voice» which  he  exerts  to  its  full  force  when  excited  ;  he  shows  excitement by  striking  his  hack  (?)  with  his  clenched  hand,  waving  his  arm  over his  head,  and  hy  other  violent  gestures.  Many  of  the  Andamanese have  a  hahit  of  striking  their  breasts  with  great  force  under  emotions of  pain  or  pleasure.  (It  is  a  gesture  of  surprise. — M.  T.  P.)
They  carried  away  the  pig's  entrails,  and  also  the  rice  and  biscuits, in  bundles  of  leaves  fastened  with  creepers.  Some  of  them  remained that  night  at  North  Point,  as  we  could  see  by  their  fires,  and  no doubt  enjoyed  a  grand  repast  and  entertainment.  When  we  were preparing  to  return,  some  of  them  showed  an  inclination  to  accom- pany us,  but  did  not  eventually  do  so,  preferring  as  we  supposed  the feast  which  we  had  provided  for  them  at  their  own  encampment. We  have  seen  enough  of  them  now  to  know  that  when  we  wish  them to  return  with  us  it  is  advisable  to  go  to  them  without  provisions,  for we  must  admit  the  unflattering  fact  that  it  is  not  any  particular love  of  us,  but  chiefly  the  greed  of  food  which  tempts  them  to  the Settlement.
On  Wednesday,  the  10th  instant,  I  again  went  with  some  officers of  Her  Majesty's  Steamer  Arracan  to  visit  the  aborigines  at Middle  Camp.  There  was  a  large  concourse  of  men  and  boys  on  the beach,  and  in  a  recess  in  the  jungle,  at  a  short  distance  from  the shore,  a  number  of  newly  made  huts,  under  each  of  which  were huddled  together  some  eight  or  ten  members  of  a  family.  Most  of them  were  covered  all  over  with  daubs  of  red  paint,  varied  with •white  patches.  I  wished  to  obtain  some  of  this  paint,  but  they  either did  not  understand  me,  or  were  unwilling  to  let  me  see  the  ingredients from  which  they  formed  it.  One  of  the  officers  afterwards  told  me that  he  saw  a  lump  of  a  hard  substance  from  which  it  was  made  that looked  like  gum.  The  paint  is  most  probably  obtained  from  the  bark of  some  tree ;  it  is  very  sticky,  and  seems  to  be  mixed  with  pig's grease,  and  cleaves  so  firmly  to  the  skin  that  it  is  difficult  to  wash  it off  even  while  moist.
(The  hard  substance  was  a  lump  of  resin,  used  for  making torches,  and  not  for  making  paint.  The  latter  is  not  obtained  from.
WITH  THE  AUDAMANESE.
a  tree,  but  is  a  burnt  earth,   mixed  with  pig's  fat,   or  turtle  oil.— M.  V.  P.)
There  was  a  great  number  of  old  people,  male  and  female,  in  the camp  and  five  or  six  babies,  the  youngest  could  not  have  been  more than  four  or  five  days  born.  The  aborigines  have  a  pathway  into the  interior,  but  the  thorny  bushes,  through  which  only  these  nimble islanders  can  twine  their  way,  rendered  it  difficult  for  us  to  proceed far  along  it.  It  would  be  interesting  to  trace  it  at  a  future  time with  a  party  of  Native  Sappers.  In  each  hut  we  saw  a  lot  of  pigs skulls  suspended  to  the  roof  by  twine,  which  seemed,  from  the  value which  they  attached  to  them,  to  have  been  hung  up  there  as  trophies. (They  were.  —  M.  V.  P.)  The  fact  that  we  found  there  no  other skulls,  but  those  of  turtles  and  human  skulls,  confirms  the  supposition that  there  are  no  esculent  mammalia,  except  pigs,  in  their  jungles.
They  were  ready  to  eat  anything,  for  we  brought  in  our  boat  a basket  of  dead  ducks  which  they  had  not  noticed  at  first,  and  which when  found  they  took  away  with  great  delight.
I  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  the  good  effect  of  the  admonition given  to  Joe  on  the  rest  of  his  tribe.  One  of  them,  who  was  a  stran- ger to  me,  was  watching  his  opportunity  to  appropriate  a  penknife which  I  had  lent  him,  when  another,  guessing  his  intention,  whis- pered some  words  in  his  ear,  and  without  my  giving  the  slightest  hint that  I  wanted  my  knife  back  again,  he  at  once  closed  the  blade  and handed  it  over  to  me.
I  was  glad  to  see  signs  of  improvement  in  their  manner  towards us,  and  of  a  more  friendly  disposition  in  the  spontaneous  readiness with  which  they  helped  us  to  land,  carrying  us  through  the  surf  on their  backs,  and  also  any  bundles  or  other  weights  which  we  chose to  entrust  to  them.  They  also  bring  through  the  jungles  without demur  any  loads  which  we  put  upon  them,  carrying  them  for  us safely,  and  break  and  remove  the  branches  which  lie  in  our  way,  and most  carefully  pluck  off  the  thorns  and  brambles,  which  sometimes stick  to  us,  and  which  are  so  sharp  that  only  their  hard  and  nimble fingers  can  safely  grasp  them.
In  my  former  report  I  remarked  on  the  sleek  and  robust  ap-
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
pearance  of  many  of  the  Andamanese  ;  but  we  have  since  met  with others  who  are  not  so  well  fed  and  thriving.    Some  indeed  are  pain- fully emaciated  in  appearance.      Hunger  sharpens  their  rapacity,  and the  sight  of  food  makes  them  almost  ferocious  in  their  eagerness to  obtain  it,  and  may  often  have  stimulated  them  to    deeds    of plunder  and  cruel  violence.     It  is  still  a  debated  question  whether the  natives  of  these  islands  are  cannibals.     It  is,   of  course,  impos- sible to  argue  from  the  presence  of  human  skulls  near  their.  dwellings, since  these  may  be  merely  valued  relics  of  their  own  deceased  kins- men, except  that  some  are  as  large  as  the  skulls  of  ordinary  human beings,  and  too  large  to  be  in  proportion  to  their  diminutive  bodies  ; but  still  skulls  and  other  remains  of  deceased  persons  of  another  race, possibly  trophies  of  slaughtered  enemies,  may   be  found  about  their encampments  without  establishing  the  fact  of  their  cannibalism. "What  lends,  however,  most  strength  to  the  supposition,  is  the  fact  of the  great  strait  to  which  in  certain  seasons,  or  at  some  antecedent period,  they   may  have  been  reduced  by  hunger,  and  thus  a  relish has    been    acquired  which   might   engender  the  horrible  practice. The  love  of  raw  flesh  (?)  is  another  presumption  in  favour  of  the  sup- position.    Their  object  in   singeing  a   pig,  for  it  cannnot  be  called roasting,  seems  not  to  be  to  cook  it,  but  to  warm  the  skin  and  render it  soft,  so  as  the  more  easily  to  scrape  off  all  the  bristle,  which  they do  with  a  sharpened  bamboo,  turning  it  from  side  to  side  and  scrap- ing as  it  singes.     Their  cooking  of  the  goats  occupied  only  one  or  two minutes,  and  it  would  probably  have  been  dispensed  with  altogether had  I  not  pointed  to  the  fire  and  suggested  the  advantage  of  a  little roasting.    We  gave  them  a  bag  of  condemned  biscuits  which  had been  thoroughly  soaked  with  salt  water,  and  so  long  lying  in  the  Com- missariat store-rooms  that  they  had   formed  into  lumps  which  were mildewed  and  filled  with  maggots.     The  savages  pryed  into  the  bag, and   when  they  saw  its  contents,  wished  to  carry  it  away  forcibly  ; and  when  we  afterwards  emptied  it,  there  was  a  general   scramble, and  hands,  and  leaves,  and  baskets  were  all  brought  into  reqrisition to   gather  up  the  last  soiled  morsels.     (The  pig  and  goats  would  be afterwards  boiled,  before  being  eaten.  —  M.  V.  P,).
WITH  THE  ANDAMAN  ESE.
The  Andamanese  set  great  value  on  all  rope  and  net-work.    Beads
which  are  only  ornamental,  are  not  so  much  cared  for.     The  bunches
of  beads  which  were  given  to  Snowball  I  afterwards  saw  adorning
Jacko's  person,  fastened  round  his  waist  and  forming  a  belt  which  he
had  plastered  all  over  with  red  paint,  so  that  none  of  the  original
colours  of  the  beads  could  be  distinguished.     Some  of  the  women  had
pieces  of  white  muslin  tied  round  their  heads  ;   they  must  have  had
them  some  time  in  their  possession,  for  they  never  to  my  knowledge
carried  away  any  muslin  from  the  Settlement.     Flannel  and  other
clothing,  which  they  might  be  supposed  to  care  for,  they  not  only  do
not  appreciate,  but  tear  to   pieces  and   throw  away.     In   walking
through  the  jungles  I  pulled  out  of  the  mud  a  pair  of  flannel  drawers
which  I  had  given  to  one  of  them,  and  which  had  been  cut  up  and
trampled  in  the  dirt.    The  Andamanese  discard  all  covering,   and
wear  only  as  distinctive   badges  (?)   bands   formed  of   their  jungle
rope,  and  ornamented  with  painted  pig's  bones,  round   their  brows
and  waists  ;  but  the  women,  even  their  youngest   female  children,
are  never  seen  altogether  naked  ;  their  waistbands  are  larger  than
those  worn  by  the  men,  and  they  can  always  be  distinguished  at  a
distance  by  the  bunches  of  dry  grass  or  fibre  which  hang  from  their
waists  behind,  and  in  front  they  have  a  small  covering  of  green  leaves
tightly  fastened  to  their  waist-belts.     I  have  never  seen  in  either  the
men  or  women  the  least  sign  of  indelicacy  ;  the  women  are  quite
modest,  but  at  the  same  time  confiding,  free,  and  familiar  ;  they  will
place  their  arms  round  our  necks,  sit  on  our  laps,  rest  their  heads  in
close  contact  with  our  faces  in  a  way  that  the  uninitiated  would  con-
sider most  amorous,  and  take  many  other  sportive  and  harmless  liber-
ties, but  in  the  most  perfect  guilelessness,  and  without  a  single  con-
scious thought  of  doing  anything  out  of  course  or  unbecoming.
Their  husbands  though,  as  was  terribly  shewn  in  the  unhappy  case  of
the  murder  of  a  European,  tenacious  of  the  honour  of  their  women,
show  no  uneasiness  or  jealousy  in  the  freedom  with  which  they
treat  us,  as  if  too  simple,  or  too  confiding  to  suspect  improper
motives.
The  Andamanese  seem  to  assign  no  particular  department  of  work
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  BELATIONS
to  their  women ;   the  latter  usually  remain  in  the  camp  with  the children,  taking  cave  of  their  huts  and  property,  while  the  men  are on  the  chase  or  fishing.     We  have  sometimes  found  not  more  than eight  or  ten  men  at  the  Chief  Camp,  and  these  generally  the  oldest and  most  sickly,  and  when  we  have  asked  the  cause  of  the  absence  of the  rest,  they  have  pointed  to  the  jangles  with  words  and  gestures signifying  that  most  of  their  trihe  had  gone  into  the  interior  on  hunt- ing excursions  in  search  of  their  favourite  "Bogo."     Jingo  informed me  that  there  was  plenty  of  the  latter  ia  the  jungles  opposite  Middle Camp.     The  numher  of  sick  in  their  camp  that  we  have  seen  in  recent visits  shews  that  with  all  their  hardy  habits  and  simple  and  primitive mode  of  living,  the  damp  and  malarious  climate  of  the  Anclamans  tries even  their  robust  constitutions  very  severely.     It  seems  a  matter  of surprise  to  some  persons  that  so  much  sickness  should  prevail  amongst Europeans  and  Natives  on  the  sea-girt  island  Avhich  we  occupy,  but they  would  no  longer  wonder  at  it  if  they  could  sea  the  effect  of  the South- West  Monsoon  on  the  aborigines    who  have  inhabited  these islands  through  many  generations,  and  who    it  might  be  supposed would  be  thoroughly  acclimatised  and  inured  to  the   changing  and  in- clement seasons.     The  most  curious  fact  is  that  they  appear  to  enjoy better  health  on  their  own  selected  swampy  grounds,  and  under  their half  exposed  and  feebly   protected  dwellings,  than  on  this  island, which  is  cleared  of  all  jungle,  and  where  they  have  the  comfort  of  a well-ventilated  and  thoroughly  water-tight  house,  raised  about  three feet  from  the  ground,  besides  the  advantage  of  ample  clothing,  warm blankets,  and  simple  and  wholesome  food,  with  no   work  to   do,   but learning  the  alphabet,  and  walking  exercise  ad  libitum.
(On  Ross  Island  they  were  always  exposed  to  the  wind  without the  shelter  of  the  jungle  in  which  the  full  force  and  effect  of  the wind  is  never  felt;  they  were  not  permitted  to  paint  themselves  with their  oily  pigments  which  afforded  their  skins  a  protection  against chills ;  they  used  clothing  to  which  they  were  not  accustomed,  and which  they  threw  off  when  they  felt  hot  and  thus  got  chilled  ;  they had  a  changed  diet  which  affected  their  stomachs,  and  a  changed  life which  affected  their  minds ;  and  they  were  thus,  and  by  inaction  BO
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  4,17
ditferent    from    their    active    jungle    life,    predisposed    to    illness. M.  F.P.)
They  suffer  most  from  coughs  and  colds,  ague,  fever,  and  severe headache.  It  is  thought  that  their  c<  tattooiag"  is  for  a  sanitary purpose,  for  they  always  wish  to  do  it  to  their  people  here  when  they are  suffering  from  any  illness.  (Mr.  Corbyn  confounds  the  "  bleeding" which  is  done  in  sickness  to  relieve  inflammation,  and  "  tattooing  " which  is  for  ornament  only — M.V.P.)
As  a  remedy  for  illness  it  is  a  very  barbarous  and  cruel  one.  (No doubt,  but  what  would  the  doctors  in  Europe  fifty  years  before  have said  to  Mr.  Corbyn  for  this  remark — M.  V.  P.)
Jumbo  had  his  leg  tattooed  by  Topsy  more  than  a  month  ago, and  he  has  ever  since  suffered  extreme  pain  from  the  sores  which  are still  raw  and  bloody.
I  now  proceed  to  a  brief  account  of  two  subsequent  visits  to  the mainland,  which  afforded  further  opportunities  of  improving  our acquaintance  with  the  aborigines.
The  object  of  the  first  was  to  carry  back  to  their  homes  some Andamanese  children,  and  to  endeavour  once  more  to  find  a  passage to  a  supposed  encampment  in  the  interior.
Some  officers  of  the  Arraoan  accompanied  the  party,  which was  composed  of  the  usual  guard  of  Naval  Brigade  men  and  some men  of  the  Sappers  under  command  of  Captain  Wetherall.
On  our  arrival  at  Chief  Camp  we  found  only  a  few  Andamanese in  the  huts ;  the  head-quarters  of  the  tribe  had  heen  moved  to  an encampment  further  to  the  north,  to  which,  later  in  the  day,  we followed  them.
Before  commencing  our  journey  we  cleared  a  wide  space  in  front of  the  beach  by  cutting  down  a  tree  which  had  spread  its  branches over  the  sand,  and  which,  while  it  remained  there,  formed  a  covert, under  shelter  of  which  the  aborigines  could  aim  at  us  with  their bows  and  arrows  without  our  seeing  them,  while  we  were  exposed  to their  attack  in  our  boats  or  on  the  beach.  On  a  former  occasion,
when  there  appeared  some  danger  of  an  encounter  with  them,  a
SB.
418  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
number  of  them  rushed  behind  this  tree  and  took  up  a  position  of defence  there,  as  if  aware  of  the  advantage  which  it  gave  them  in the  event  of  a  disturbance ;  and  they  would  then  probably  have  shot at  some  of  us  if  we  had  not  taken  one  of  them  a  prisoner,  and  held him  before  us  to  cover  our  retreat.
This  done,  we  pursued  the  inland  route,  along  the  road  formerly cleared  by  the  Sappers ;  but  afterwards  finding  marks  of  a  track branching  into  another  direction,  we  followed  it  in  hope  that  it  might lead  to  an  encampment,  in  which  we  were  not  disappointed ;  for,  after we  had  proceeded  about  two  miles,  we  suddenly  came  upon  a  party of  aborigines  grouped  together  in  a  cleared  enclosure,  which  was  so thickly  surrounded  with  jungle  that  it  was  not  till  we  were  within  a few  yards  of  it  that  we  saw  the  smoke  of  their  fire;  and  we  might, even  at  that  distance,  have  passed  it  by  unnoticed  had  not  our  course lain  across  a  stream  above  which  the  smoke  issued.
They  remained  quite  silent  till  we  came  close  to  them,  as  if playfully  or  for  some  reason,  wishing  to  conceal  themselves  ;  they  then jumped  up  and  came  towards  us,  seeming  much  amused  that  we  had found  out  their  hiding  place.  Jingo  and  Jacko,  who  were  of  the number,  but  so  grotesquely  painted  that  we  could  not  recognise  their features,  explained  to  us  that  they  had  just  returned  from  hunting, but  apparently  without  success,  as  there  were  no  pig  bones,  nor  re- mains of  food  on  the  ground  ;  they  had  taken  the  precaution  to  put away  their  weapons  and  other  property,  but,  on  our  promising  not  to follow  them,  they  fetched  us  some  bows  and  arrows  from  some  bushes where  they  had  concealed  them.
The  discovery  of  this  encampment  in  the  densest  part  of  the  jungle is  of  some  interest,  as  showing  the  fallacy  of  the  opinion,  so  long maintained,  that  the  interior  of  these  islands  is  not  inhabited,  and  that the  aboriginal  population  is  altogether  restricted  to  the  coast,  both  on account  of  the  density  of  the  forest,  and  the  want  of  food  any  where but  near  the  sea.
The  density  of  the  forest  is  certainly  no  bar  to  its  occupation,  for they  have  been  found  in  all  parts  of  the  forest  which  have  yet  been
WITH  THE  ANDAMAN ESE.
penetrated,  and  the  fact  that  their  chief  employment  is  pig  hunting shows  that  they  are  not  entirely  dependent  on  the  coast  fisheries  for their  subsistence.
The  numerous  creeks  and  rivers  by  which  the  interior  is  inter- sected, and  which  abound  with  fish,  must  yield  quite  as  plentiful  and much  more  certain  subsistence  than  the  sea,  which  for  more  than  half the  year  is  almost  unapproachable  on  account  of  the  surf  and  stormy weather;  and  even  Native  convicts,  who  have  escaped  from  the Settlement,  have  contrived  to  subsist  for  a  length  of  time  on  the herbs  and  berries  which  are  found  in  the  woods.
It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  the  aborigiaes  roam  all  over  the mainland  in  search  of  food  and  in  the  spirit  of  adventure,  and  that their  resources  are  as  varied  and  abundant  as  their  range  is  extensive. (Dudhnath  had  already  ascertained  the  above  facts,  which  to  a  certain extent  are  correct,  but  the  difference  between  the  An-ydHto  and  Erem- taga  tribes  was  not  then  known — M.  V.P.)
More  recently  some  of  them,  apparently  of  another  tribe,  have been  met  with  in  the  very  heart  of  the  interior ;  and  an  acquaintance with  their  language  and  further  researches  may  yet  discover  to  us numerous  tribes  occupying  inland  tracts,  and  living  quite  as  much  by the  chase  and  the  wild  produce  of  the  soil  as  by  fishing.
Our  explorations  came  to  an  end  about  a  mile  further,  some  of  our party  being  too  fatigued  to  continue  the  journey ;  we,  therefore,  agreed to  return  and  proceed  in  our  boats  further  to  the  north,  where  the aborigines  had  fixed  their  new  encampment.
The  Andamanese  with  us  directed  us  to  a  sandy  beach  about  two miles  to  the  north,  and  on  nearer  approach  we  saw  a  long  row  of  huts and  crowds  of  men  and  women  in  great  bustle,  running  from  one  hut  to another,  and  carrying  away  bundles  which  probably  contained  pro- perty, which  they  were  anxious  to  conceal  from  us.  We  had  much difficulty  in  landing ;  the  surf  rose  so  high  that  few  of  us  escaped  a drenching,  and  tbe  sailors  were  obliged  to  leave  their  fire-arms  in the  boats,  which,  however,  were  sufficiently  near  to  render  assistance if  it  had  been  needed.
420  •*•  HISTORY  OF  OUtt  RELATIONS
The  rice  and  biscuits  which  we  had   brought  as   our   usual   peace offering  to  the  aborigines  were  completely  saturated  with   salt   water, but  to  their  taste  they  were  no  worse  for  their  wetting.     They  carried them  to  the  camp  where  there  was  a  great   scramble— all  of  them crowding  round  with  leaves  and  shells  and  baskets  to   catch  the   con- tents of  the  bags  as  they  were  distributed  ;  it  was  amusing  to  observe their  cunning  artifices  to  attract  iny  attention  as  I  served  out  the  rice to  them — those  whom  I  knew  thrust   themselves   most     prominently before  me,  reminding  me  of   our   acquaintance  by  pointing   to  them-? selves,   and  repeating  the   names   which   we  had  given   them  :  the woman  Emma  put  her  baby  forward  to  intercede  for   her   and  wished to  force  him  into  my  arms,  and  the  sly  little   creature  aided  her  diplo- macy by  holding  out  his  tiny  hands   towards   me,  and   looking  at  me most  appealingly  ;  and  when  I  gave  him  some  rice  he   ate  it  raw,  as did  also  his  mother  and  other  aborigines.
There  were  great  lamentations  in  the  camp  over  one  of  the  boys who  had  returned  with  us  ;  he  had  been  absent  some  weeks,  and  his apprehensive  relations  had  probably  been  distressing  their  minds  with misgivings  of  his  safety,  or  fears  that  he  might  not  be  allowed  to return  to  them  again.  I  never  knew  people  more  eccentric  in  their affection.  They  will  sometimes,  when  they  meet  again  after  only  a night's  separation,  fall  on  each  other's  necks  and  weep  most  affect- ingly,  though  they  have  been  at  the  same  time  on  the  same  island, and  separated  only  by  the  distance  between  my  house  and  the Andaman  Home.
We  had  an  opportunity  this  time  of  seeing  the  manufacture  of hemp  for  bowstrings.  It  was  obtained  from  the  under-bark  of  a light  coloured  tree,  peculiar  to  the  Andaman  jungles  ;  they  peeled off  long  strips,  and  wove  it  together  with  their  hands  and  feet  :  it  is strong  and  durable,  but  not  so  flexible  as  some  thinner  twine  they use  for  fishing  lines,  and  which  seems  to  be  made  of  a  softer  fibre.
(There  are  several  mistakes  here.  There  is  no  hemp  in  the Andaman  Islands.  What  Mr.  Corbyn  saw  was  the  manufacture  of «« Betmo "  rope,  from  the  "  Alaba  "  fibre;  this  is  used  for  turtle- harpoon  lines,  and  for  turtle  nets.  It  is  never  used  for  bowstrings,
WITH  THE  ANPAMANESB.  421
in  the  making  of    which   "Y61ba"  fibre   is   exclusively  used.     The Andamanese  have  no  fishing  lines — M,  V,  P.)
They  showed  themselves  much  more  friendly  disposed  towards  us now  than  they  had  been  in  the  morning.  At  the  other  camp  they held  aloof  from  us  at  first,  and  seemed  rather  morose  and  suspicious, which  I  attributed  to  the  presence  of  so  many  armed  Natives  whom, they  seem  to  fear,  or  rather  distrust,  much  more  than  Europeans, perhaps  because  they  have  learnt  that  we  never  use  weapons  against them  except  in  defence  or  under  great  provocation,  or  in  cases  of extreme  necessity  ;  while  experience  has  taught  them  that  the  former are  not  always  so  scrupulous  and  forbearing.  I  have  heard  that  at one  time  some  of  the  south  tribe  used  frequently  to  visit  the  Settle- ment at  Viper  Island,  and  were  on  very  friendly  terms  with  the native  fishermen,  whom  they  assisted  in  mending  their  nets,  and never  molested  or  interfered  with  their  fisheries — when  all  at  once for  some  trifling  offence  of  some  petty  thefts  of  fruit  and  vegetables, in  which  they  had  been  indulged  till  they  thought  it  allowable,  the natives  attacked  them  with  sticks  and  stones,  and  because  they resisted,  as  it  was  natural  they  should  do,  they  were  hunted  down  and shot,  and  several  of  them  were  wounded,  and  one  or  more  killed.
The  consequence  has  been  that,  though  often  seen  in  their  canoes, they  never  again  approached  the  island,  and  always  fled  from  boats •which  followed  them,  and  no  advances  could  induce  them  to  hold  any communication  with  us  till  very  recently.  These  were  probably  the same  people  whom  I  described  as  being  so  cruel  and  implacable  in their  hatred  towards  native  convicts,  as  having  resisted  my  friendly overtures  to  them  notwithstanding  the  mediation  of  the  Andamanese Avith  me,  who  no  doubt  gave  them  a  favourable  representation  of  the treatment  they  have  met  with.  I  was  not  surprised  to  hear, •when  I  returned  with  Cnptain  Wetherall  to  the  other  camp  where we  had  left  the  Sappers,  that  the  Andamanese  occupying  that  camp had  all  taken  their  departure  simultaneously  with  us,  some  of  them having  followed  us,  and  the  rest  retreated  into  the  woods  carrying nwny  everything  but  the  bare  huts  with  them.  (It  is  clue  to  Major JInughton's  administration  of  Andamanese  afMrs  to  point  out  that
422  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATION
Mr.  Corbyn  has  given  above  a  distorted  account  of  the  occurrences  on Viper  Island.  His  statements  are  exaggerated  and  incorrect,  and  he appears  to  overlook  the  habitual  looting  by  his  own  parties  of  the Andamanese  bows  and  arrows. — M,  V.  P.)
This  trip  ended,  we  soon  afterwards  (13th  June)  formed  a  party  to visit  the  south  coast,  where  we  expected  to  meet  with  the  tribe  who were  known  to  frequent  the  woods  about  Aberdeen,  and  who  distin- guished themselves  some  years  ago  by  the  part  which  they  took  in  a ludicrous  skirmish  known  in  the  chronicles  of  the  Settlement  as  the "  Battle  of  Aberdeen.  "
(I  have  heard  accounts  of  the  "  Battle  of  Aberdeen  "  from  Lieute- nant Warden,  who  was  present  in  command  of  part  of  the  Naval Brigade  ;  from  "Wologa  J61ah,  one  of  the  Andamanese  chiefs  in  com- mand of  the  aborigines  ;  and  from  other  Andamanese  who  were  pre- sent ;  and  it  would  appear  that,  far  from  being  a  "  ludicrous  skir- mish, "  it  was  the  most  desperate  and  determined  attack  ever  made on  our  Settlement.  The  intention  of  the  aborigines  was,  they acknowledge,  to  exterminate  us.  Mr.  Corbyn  might  have  allowed Ms  own  work  with  the  Andamanese  to  stand  on  its  own  merits,  and there  was  no  necessity  for  him  to  belittle  the  work  of  his  prede- cessors, or  to  hold  the  occurrences  of  their  time  up  to  unjust  ridi- cule.— M.  V.  P.)
We  started  in  large  force ;  the  officers  of  the  Arracan  and Tulal  Cain  lent  two  boats,  and  most  of  them  accompanied  us ; Lieutenant  Gill,  who  had  come  in  the  Arracan  in  command  of  a detachment  of  soldiers  in  charge  of  prisoners,  brought  with  him twelve  of  his  men,  and  Colonel  Tytler  furnished  a  guard  of  an  equal number  of  armed  natives.  The  Andamanese  woman  Topsy  acted  as our  guide,  but  was  with  great  difficulty  persuaded  to  go  with  us— she  screamed  and  cried,  and  clung  to  her  husband  Jumbo,  and appealed  with  tears  to  Colonel  Tytler  not  to  allow  them  to  be  separated, and  when  we  pulled  away  from  the  island  she  kept  her  eyes  fixed on  the  beach,  and  shouted  to  Jumbo  who  ran  along  the  shore  and responded  to  her  cries  till  we  were  out  of  hearing.  We  assured  her that  we  should  return  that  evening,  but  the  sight  of  our  large  party,
WITH  TBE  ANDAMANESE.  423
and  of  so  many  boats  steering  not  towards  her  own  camp  but  in  an opposite  direction,  seemed  to  alarm  her,  and  she  may  have  supposed that  we  were  bent  on  a  hostile  expedition  against  the  South  Tribe, and  feared  the  consequences  if  she  fell  into  their  hands  ;  as  it  is evident,  from  their  frequent  repudiation  of  any  connection  with  them, that  there  is  no  friendly  feeling  between  the  aborigines  of  the  north and  those  who  occupy  the  mainland  to  the  southward.  As  we  passed by  the  coast  near  "  Aberdeen  "  we  waved  bunches  of  plantains  and called  to  the  aborigines,  some  of  whom  were  seen  on  the  trees  skip- ping from  branch  to  branch  with  the  nimbleness  of  monkeys  ;  but from  the  height  from  which  they  were  watching  us,  they  could  see the  muskets  in  our  boats,  which  probably  frightened  them,  for  they neither  replied  nor  approached  any  nearer.  The  party  went  on  to Snake  Island,  and  landed  on  it  for  breakfast.  There  was  a  great abundance  of  rare  shells  on  the  beach  ;  and  Topsy  seemed  to  be  sensible of  their  value  to  us ;  for,  as  soon  as  we  landed,  she  went,  of  her  own accord,  and  collected  a  large  number  of  them  for  me,  and  made  such a  good  selection  that  I  was  glad  to  accept  them  ;  at  this  she  was pleased,  saying  she  had  collected  them  for  "  Myjola  "  the  name  which the  aborigines  have  given  me  signifying  "Protector.  >:  (Mala  or Mam  Jolah,  a  Honorific  meaning  "  a  person  of  importance,"  "  one  to be  be  respected,"  "Sir,"  etc.—  M.  V.  P.)
Having  breakfasted  and  finished  our  inspection  of  the  island, we  next  steered  to  a  large  sandy  beach  on  the  mainland  directly opposite.  (Now  called  after  Mr.  Corbyn,  "  South  Corbyn's  Cove." — M.  F.  P.)
As  soon  as  we  landed,  the  soldiers  commenced  to  clear  the  jungles, and  to  form  a  strong  position  to  protect  our  boats  and  party  in  the event  of  our  being  attacked.  To  the  south  of  this  beach  is  a  fresh- water creek  ;  near  which,  on  the  bank,  were  the  remains  of  a  fire which  was  still  warm  and  not  quite  extinguished,  and  scattered  about on  the  ground  green  leaves  with  grains  of  boiled  rice  and  pineapple peels  and  cockle  shells,  and  the  soil  was  marked  with  footprints much  larger  than  those  of  the  aborigines,  from  which  we  inferred that  some  escaped  convicts,  of  whom  there  are  many  dwelling  in  the
424
A  HISTORY  0?  OUR  RELATIONS
woods,  had  just  been  cooking  their  food  there,  and  hud  fled  into  the jungles  when  they  saw  us  approaching.
(It  is  remarkable  that  it  never  seems  to  have  occurred  to  Mr. Corbyn's  parties  to  use  the  Andamanese  to  help  them  track  and  catch these  men..  Much  energy  was  spent  in  hunting  the  Andamanese and  cutting  roads  through  the  jungle  to  their  encampments,  but  no one  troubled  about  the  runaway  convicts. — M,  V.  P.)
Lieutenant  Gill  directed  the  soldiers  to  remain  on  the  beach •while  we  explored  the  creek,  which  was  so  deep  and  wide  at  its mouth  that  we  were  curious  to  see  how  far  it  penetrated  ;  and  we  also hoped  to  find  an  encampment  of  the  tribe,  though  Topsy,  who seemed  to  be  acquainted  with  their  movements,  assured  us  that  there were  none  of  them  encamped  in  that  direction  "  Boodee  Yorbudda" (Bud  r/a'&a-da,  means  "no  hut  "),  and  urged  us  to  go  to  the  north where  her  own  tribe  was  stationed.
About  six  (?)  miles  from  the  coast  we  found  a  large  encampment containing  about  fifteen  huts,  very  prettily  situated  on  the  right  bank of  the  creek  in  the  middle  of  a  large  and  well  shaded  bamboo  grove.
Topsy 's  information  proved  to  be  correct,  for  it  was  quite  deserted and  had  apparently  not  been  inhabited  for  many  months.  We searched  the  bushes  for  bows  and  arrows (!),  but  could  find  no  relics of  the  tribe,  except  cockle  shells  strewed  over  the  ground.  The  creek abounds  with  cockles  and  shrimps,  the  latter  are  so  plentiful  that the  boatmen  caught  them  in  their  clothes  as  they  waded  through  the stream.  We  also  collected  a  quantity  of  oysters,  of  which  there  was a  bed  at  the  mouth  of  the  creek.  Some  of  these  oyster  beds  have been  allowed  to  go  on  accumulating  for  years,  the  aborigines  never disturbing  them ;  for  though  partial  to  all  other  kind  of  shell-fish, they  seem  to  have  a  disrelish  for  oysters,  probably  on  account  of the  copper  they  contain.(!?)  The  young  and  smaller  sort  are  not  at all  of  inferior  quality  to  the  best  imported  oysters ;  and  have,  perhaps, a  purer  taste  of  the  genuine  native  oyster.
On  our  return  we  found  the  soldiers  still  stationed  where  we  had left  them.  Some  of  them  had  beguiled  the  time  with  bathing,  but they  had  met  with  no  adventure  to  divert  them,  except  an  unsuccess-
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
ful  chase  after  a  pig,  and  had  not  seen  any  aborigines.  To  indulge their  curiosity,  I  proposed  to  visit  the  North  Tribe,  and  to  take  to them  the  pigs  and  provisions  which  we  had  brought  to  propitiate  the other  tribe  who  seemed  so  little  disposed  to  reciprocate  our  friendly advances.  Topsy  was  greatly  distressed  as  we  passed  Ross  Island, and  stood  up  in  the  boat  and  called  to  Jumbo,  but  she  recovered  her spirits  at  the  sight  of  friends  ;  as  soon  as  we  reached  the  camp  and went  amongst  them  exchanging  news  and  describing  to  them  all that  she  had  observed  during  the  morning  excursion.  She  was  very much  afraid  that  we  would  leave  her  at  the  camp,  and  frequently came  to  me  entreating  me  to  allow  her  to  return  with  us  to  Ross Island.  As  I  was  walking  on  the  shore  she  came  and  caught  me  by the  arm,  and  enjoining  secrecy  and  silence,  slily  beckoned  to  me  to follow  her,  and  then  looking  cautiously  round  to  see  that  no  one  was watching  her,  she  led  me  through  the  jungle  till  we  came  to  a  tree amongst  the  foliage  of  which  was  carefully  concealed  a  large  bundle of  arrows.  She  pointed  to  them  and  made  signs  to  me  to  take  them, and  then  ran  away  laughing  and  calling  out  as  she  went  <c  Jumbol tweeken,"  which  was  a  significant  hint  that  she  had  shown  me  the arrows  as  an  inducement  to  take  her  back  to  Jumbo.  (The  above words  are  not  understood.  —  M.  V.  P.)
"When  I  carried  them  to  the  camp  she  looked  perfectly  innocent  of the  transaction,  and  pretended  to  the  owner  that  I  had  discovered them  myself  while  searching  about  the  bushes,  which  the  man  believed, though  if  they  had  known  how  I  came  by  them  they  would  have been  very  indignant  with  Topsy  for  betraying  their  treasures  to  me. I  was  glad  to  observe  a  proof  of  grateful  feeling  on  the  part  of  Crusoe towards  one  of  our  party,  Mr.  D'Cruze,  of  the  Tubal  Cain,  who had  shewn  him  much  kindness  on  their  passage  from  Moulmein  to Port  Blair,  two  years  before.  He  at  once  recognized  Mr.  D'Cruze,  and ran  and  threw  his  arms  round  his  neck  ;  and  then  leaving  him  went and  brought  him  from  the  woods  a  finely  finished  bow,  which  a  short time  before  he  had  denied  giving  to  some  stranger  who  had  offered  him cutlery  of  much  more  than  its  value  in  eichange  for  one.  I  have seen  Crusoe,  who  is  evidently  a  man  of  some  consequence  amongst
•  i
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
the  tribe,  shed  tears  like  a  child  when  his  feelings  have  been  acted upon.  ;  and  I  cannot  think  that  these  poor  people  are  so  brutalized,  as they  have  been  represented  to  be,  when  I  see  them  evince  so  much sympathy  and  tenderness,  and  cling  so  fondly  and  confidingly  to those  who  have  befriended  them.  I  am  certain  that  those  of  them who  have  been  a  short  time  under  my  care  in  Port  Blair  would follow  me  anywhere,  and  commit  their  lives  to  my  protection  with implicit  confidence  ;  and  I  believe  in  the  same  way,  in  the  course  of time,  by  kind  and  firm  treatment  all  the  other  tribes,  if  they  at  all resemble  those  whom  we  have  conciliated  and  attached  to  us,  might  be rendered  equally  tractable  and  submissive,  and  reclaimed  out of  their  present  state  of  barbarism  into  a  condition  in  which  they would  be  of  essential  service  to  the  interests  of  the  Settlement  by facilitating  discoveries  and  removing  the  obstacles  which  are  at present  opposed  to  the  development  of  the  great  natural  wealth  and advantages  of  these  islands.
Snowball  was  lying  in  one  of  the  huts  and  seemed  almost  insensi- ble from  the  effects  of  a  severe  fever  from  which  he  was  suffering. He  had  nothing  under  him  but  a  thin  mat  ;  his  head  rested  on  the lap  of  a  woman  who  strongly  resembled  him,  and  appeared  to  be about  the  same  age  ;  but  Crusoe  who  understands  a  few  words  of English  told  us  that  she  was  his  "  Mama.  "  The  poor  woman  was very  much  afflicted,  and  nursed  and  fondled  him  with  great  affection, doing  all  she  could  by  the  most  tender  care  to  alleviate  his sufferings.
There  was  a  large  canoe  in  the  creek  concealed  under  some  bushes  ; the  Andamanese  looked  disappointed  and  annoyed  when  we  discovered it,  but  they  were  very  much  pleased  when  they  saw  that  we  had  no intention  to  deprive  them  of  it.
(All  the  timidity  and  hostility  about  which  Mr.  Corbyn  makes such  a  fuss  was  occasioned  by  the  fear  of  having  their  property  stolen by  us,  and  it  cannot  be  wondered  at  when  one  considers  how  their bows,  arrows,  and  other  articles  seem  to  have  been  taken  whenever  our parties  landed.  —  M.  V.  P.)
When  we  were  about  to  return,  several  of  the  women  and  children
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  42?
ran  to  our  boats  and  jumped  into  them  of  their  own  accord.  Topsy had  secured  a  seat  long  before  we  started,  and  screamed  and  made great  resistance  when  we  pretended  to  oust  her  out  of  it  ;  the  rest almost  capsized  our  boat  in  their  ecstacies  o£  mirth,  swinging  their arms,  and  dancing  on  the  benches  and  sides  of  the  boat  as  vigorously and  with  as  much  coolness  and  disregard  of  consequences  as  if  they had  been  "  tirpahing  "  on  the  boards  of  a  verandah  ;  the  women were  fascinated  with  the  red  coats  of  the  soldiers,  and  paid  them  the most  embarrassing  attentions,  seating  themselves  quite  leisurely  on their  laps,  putting  their  arms  round  their  necks,  slapping  their  faces, pulling  their  whiskers,  and  indulging  in  other  sportive  and  absurd liberties.
When,  on  our  arrival  at  Ross,  they  had  all  assembled  at  the Andaman  Home,  they  began  as  usual  to  relate  to  each  other  all  that they  had  observed  during  the  day,  describing  the  most  minute  occur- rences, and  mimicking  and  "taking off"  anything  that  appeared  to them  droll  and  laughable  in  our  manners  and  actions.  Topsy's vanity  was  particularly  gratified  by  the  importance  which  she  assum- ed in  the  estimation  of  the  audience ;  she  told  them  how  much  her services  had  been  in  demand  during  the  day,  that  some  one  or  other was  constantly  calling  to  her  "here  Topsy,  there  Topsy,  Topsy,  Topsy, come  Topsy  "  (she  remembered  and  repeated  the  words),  and  that one  person  would  drag  her  by  the  arm  in  one  direction,  and  another in  another.  They  have  all  a  lively  sense  of  humour  and  uncommon powers  of  mimicry,  and  their  words,  which  are  delivered  with  a  rapid and  voluble  utterance,  sound  singularly  droll  in  connection  with their  comical  gestures.
(Mr.  Corbyn's  description  of  the  personal  behaviour  of  the  Anda- menese  is  excellent  and  perfectly  true  to  life;  It  is  a  pity  that  more care  was  not  taken  of  the  woman  Topsy,  who  seems  to  have  been invaluable.—^.  V.  P.)
Soon  after  this  I  paid  another  visit  to  the  mainland  in  order  to give  any  of  the  Andamanese  in  the  Settlement,  who  wished  to  return to  their  homes,  an  opportunity  to  do  so.  Only  one  of  them,  the
woman  Bess,  Snowball's  wife,  availed  herself  of  the  opportunity.
3  i  2
428  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
I  have  seen  it  stated  that  the  people  are  detained  at  the  Andaman Home  against  their  will  ;  but  a  simple  refutation  of  this  mis-state- ment may  be  adduced  from  the  fact  that  they  are  now  only  too anxious  to  come  to  the  Settlement,  and  that  we  have  much  more difficulty  in  keeping  them  away  from  this  island  than  in  inducing  them to  remain  here.  It  would  obviously  be  a  false  policy,  if  we  wish  to conciliate  and  attract  them  to  us,  to  put  such  a  restraint  upon  their liberty,  and  make  their  stay  compulsory  ;  for,  however  well  it  might succeed  for  the  time,  eventually  they  would  dislike  and  shun  us  ; and  our  object,  which  is  to  familiarise  them  with  us,  and  to  shew them  that  our  intentions  towards  them  are  friendly  and  pacific,  would be  neutralized  and  defeated.  We  certainly  cannot  have  boats  daily plying  backwards  and  forwards  to  their  camps,  and  indulge  every sudden  whim  of  theirs  to  go  over  to  the  mainland,  perhaps  for  no more  urgent  purpose  than  to  paint  themselves,  or  to  hunt  after  pigs, for  were  we  to  yield  to  such  capricious  fancies,  there  would  be  no limit  to  their  exactions ;  but  when  they  are  really  anxious  to  leave they  are  always  permitted  to  do  so  within  reasonable  intervals,  and the  best  proof  that  they  do  not  consider  themselves  involuntarily detained  is,  that,  notwithstanding  the  grievances  invented  and  alleged on  their  behalf,  these  very  Andamanese,  who  are  said  to  be  pining in  imprisonment,  after  they  have  been  released,  return  of  their  own accord  to  their  dungeons,  and  during  the  time  I  have  resided  here they  have  come  back  time  after  time,  some  of  them  remaining  away only  one  or  two  days,  and  they  make  a  more  lengthened  stay  each time  that  they  return.  It  is  of  course  difficult  to  wean  them  all  at once  from  habits  and  modes  of  life  to  which  they  have  become  at- tached by  long  custom,  but  in  many  respects  they  are  gradually  assi- milating themselves  to  our  ways  and  practices,  and  can  perceive  and appreciate  the  superior  comforts  and  advantages  of  civilization,  and evidently  prefer  them  to  the  exposure  and  severe  hardships  which they  undergo  in  their  own  jungles.
(I  have,  in  justice  to  Mr.  Corbyn,  allowed  the  above  passage  to stand  as  written  by  him,  but,  whatever  may  have  been  the  custom at  the  actual  period  when  he  wrote  it,  there  can  be  no  doubt,  from
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  499
Colonel  Tytler's  letters,  and  from  the  subsequent  letters  of  Major Ford,  that  the  Andamaneso  wore  detained  against  their  will  in  the Andaman  Home,  and  that  considerable  and  illegal  pressure  was  put on  them  to  keep  them  there. — M.  V.  P.)
My  next  visit  was  to  a  camp  far  to  the  northward,  nearly  out  of sight  of  Ross  Island.  The  surf  here  was  very  high  and  we  were unable  to  land.  The  Andamanese  came  down  on  the  beach  and  Bess jumped  out  of  the  boat  and  swam  ashore  diving  below  the  breakers, and  gliding  through  the  surf  with  wonderful  speed  and  agility.  Five of  the  aborigines  seeing  that  we  were  prepared  to  return  to  Port Blair  swam  out  to  us,  and  others  were  about  to  follow,  but  we  sailed away,  fearing  to  overcrowd  our  boat  with  too  many  of  them.  They seemed  to  have  shifted  their  camp  in  search  of  food,  for  those  who joined  us  looked  wretchedly  famished,  and  slapped  their  shrunken stomachs  and  pointed  to  Ross  Island,  as  an  intimation  that  they  were in  want  of  food  and  wished  to  return  there  to  replenish  themselves. As  the  wind  was  against  us  we  had  to  tack  back,  at  which  the  Anda- manese were  uneasy  and  impatient,  and  could  not  understand  why  we should  put  ourselves  to  the  trouble  of  tacking  so  frequently  ;  they constantly  pointed  to  the  island,  and  evidently  thought  it  a  matter  of perfectly  plain  sailing  to  steer  straight  to  it,  and  were  puzzled  and vexed  that  we  so  often  deviated  from  our  direct  course  and  sailed  in directions  quite  opposite  to  our  destination.  They  showed  their  usual contrivance  in  sheltering  themselves  from  the  rain  by  using  our mats  to  make  coverings  in  the  shape  of  their  huts  slantingly  opposed to  the  wind,  under  which  they  crouched  together  and  kept  themselves quite  warm  and  dry  ;  while  we  were  exposed  to  a  pelting  rain  and almost  cramped  with  the  damp  and  chilly  night  air.
After  this  excursion,  I  seldom  attempted  to  visit  the  aborigines  at any  of  their  encampments  beyond  North  Point,  but  they  have  often come  down  to  the  coast  opposite  the  Settlement  and  signalled  by  fires to  us  to  send  boats  for  them,  and  when  we  have  done  so,  many  of them,  sometimes  seventeen  and  eighteen  at  a  time,  and  mostly women  and  children,  have  seized  the  opportunity  of  returning  to their  "  Home  "  here.
430
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
A  few  weeks  ago  a  European  convict  passing  close  to  the  mainland saw  some  Native  convicts  and  A  ndamanese,  and  the  latter  pointed  to the  convicts  and  made  signs  to  him  to  come  and  take  them.    He believed  that  they  had  brought  back  the  convicts,  perhaps  as  a  means of  attracting  boats  which  would  otherwise  not  approach  them  ;  there being  an  order   against   persons   landing   at  any   place  on  the  South Andaman  where  the  aborigines  are  known  to  have  their  encampments. More  convicts  than  ever   now   escape  to   North  Point,   emboldened, no  doubt,  by  the  more  friendly  temper  of   the  aborigines  towards  us  ; formerly,  they  were  terror-stricken  at  the  sight  of  the  ferocious  and formidable  islanders,   and  avoided   an  Andamanese   camp    as  they would  have  shunned  the  lair  of  a  wild  beast ;  but  having   lately  seen them  resort  here  so  frequently,   and   having   heard  no  doubt  of  the warning  impressed  on  them  of    the   punishment  which  would  attend their  ill-treatment  of  any  person  belonging  to   the   Settlement,  they take  advantage  of  it  to  presume  on  their  forbearance  and  indulgence, and  now  go   quite   freely  amongst  them  and  even  try  to  extract  food from  them.     The  Andamanese   have  now  become   so   accustomed  to see  convicts  coming  to  their  camps,   that  when   any   of   them  here offend  them,  they  threaten  them  with  their  revenge  when  they  catch them  on  the  mainland ;  and  many  of  them,   with  that  superstitious feeling  which  is   so   stroag   in  natives  of   India,  are  really  afraid  to injure  them  or  to  incur  their  resentment,  for  fear  that,   by  some  for- tuitous mishap,  they  might  some  day  be  tempted  to  run  away  and  fall into  the  hands  of  vindictive  enemies.     Colonel  Tytler  is  anxious  that I  should  try  to  find  some  means  of  inducing  our  Andamanese  friends to  recapture  escaped  convicts ;  and  it  would  perhaps  be  an  act  of mercy  to  do  so,  if  only  to  hinder  Natives  from  going  amongst  a  people so  little  under  the  restraint   of   order,  and  provoking   and  instigating them  to  bloodshed,  and  all  other  acts  of   violence,  by  the   annoyance which  they  cause  them  ;  the  result   of   even   one  indiscreet  or  hasty act  being,  perhaps,   to  fatally    mar   our  attempts   to  conciliate  and civilize  them ;  but   I   fear  that,   if   we   invested  people   of  such   a turbulent  and  reckless  disposition  with  a  police   control  over   truant Natives,  we  might  let  loose  their  worst  passions  and  encourage  their
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
inclination,  which  can  now  hardly  be  subsided,  to  attack  and  ill-use peaceable  and  unoffending  Natives  indiscriminately  with  those  who outlaw  themselves  and  forfeit  all  protection  by  trying  to  evade  the sentence  which  has  bound  them  to  the  Settlement.
(Colonel  Tytler  was  right  in  his  wish  to  make  the  Andamanese recapture  the  runaway  convicts,  and  they,  in  the  above  instance,  show that  they  were  willing  to  do  so  and  to  bring  them  in  unharmed, if  they  made  no  resistance.  Mr.  Corbyn  did  not  appreciate  how  far the  friendly  relations  with  the  Andamauese  had  reached,  nor  did  he understand  their  nature,  that  of  the  convicts,  or  his  own  duty  to the  Government  of  India  in  his  capacity  of  Officer  in  charge  of  the Andamanese.  It  was  for  him  to  see  that  the  convicts  were  unharmed, and  that  atrocities  did  not  occur,  and  had  the  steps  Colonel  Tytler recommended  been  then  taken,  a  great  advance  would  have  been made  by  enlisting  the  Audamanese  on  the  side  of  the  Government, and  the  discipline  of  the  Settlement  would  have  improved. Mr.  Corbyn  seems  to  have  lost  sight  of  the  fact  that  the  Natives were  convicts,  who,  once  they  had  escaped  from  imprisonment,  had  to be  arrested  at  all  risks,  and  that  no  consideration  was  due  to  them  ; moreover,  the  episodes  of  the  Mutiny  should  have  taught  him  that these  same  convicts  deserved  at  least  equally  as  much  as  the  Andama- nese the  abusive  adjectives  he  was  so  fond  of  applying  to  the  latter. The  fact  was  that  he  did  not  understand  the  Andamanese,  and  it becomes  more  and  more  apparent  from  this  time  that  his  treatment of  them  was  mistaken  and  improper.  After  events  have  shown  us that  he  ought  to  have  cultivated  friendly  relations  between  the Andamanese  and  Europeans  only,  and  so  long  as  the  Natives  were  not molested  by  the  aborigines,  the  less  the  two  had  to  do  with  each other  the  better.— M.  V.  P.)
If  we  derive  advantages,  as  we  undoubtedly  do,  from  maintain- ing a  good  understanding  with  the  aborigines  of  these  islands,  it  is certainly  an  evil  consequent  on  it,  that  it  gives  encouragement  to convicts  to  try  and  effect  their  freedom,  and  to  evade  their  work  suc- cessfully for  a  considerable  time ;  for  they  may  now  venture  into  the wide  jungles  and  traverse  the  whole  mainland  with  almost  complete
432
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
impunity,  which  they  were  far  from  likely  to  do  before  the  Andama- nese  were  intimidated  into  humane  and  tolerant  conduct  towards them.  (Thus  showing  what  a  mistake  this  intimidation  was. —
M.  r.  P.)
Formerly,  if  one  of  them  met  an  Andamanese  armed  with  how and  arrows,  he  was  immediately  attacked  and  stripped,  and  deprived of  all  that  he  carried  with  him ;  and  the  cowardly  promptitude  with which  he  yielded,  and  his  supplicating  and  obsequious  manner  only excited  contempt  and  derision,  and  provoked  that  malicious  pleasure which  savages  find  in  seeing  their  victims  writhe  and  look  miserable under  the  tortures  which  they  inflict  upon  them.  I  have  heard natives  describe  and  admit  their  dismay  and  terror  in  one  of  these encounters  with  the  savages.  Some  of  them  were  once  working  in the  woods  near  Haddo,  when  they  were  suddenly  confronted  by  two Andamanese  with  bows  and  arrows,  which  they  brandished  and pointed  menacingly  towards  them.  At  the  sight  of  the  hatchets  in the  hands  of  the  convicts  they  danced  and  laughed  exultingly. The  convicts,  afraid  to  run,  fell  at  full  length  on  the ground,  and  clasped  the  feet  of  the  savages  imploring  mercy,  and crying  to  their  "Ram, "  "Ram;"  the  savages  imitated  even  their prostrate  and  supplicating  postures  and  cdngee,  and  reflected  with painful  and  cruel  accuracy  their  affrighted  and  deprecating  gestures  ; and  when  their  love  of  mimicry  was  satiated,  and  they  had  danced and  laughed  and  slapped  their  shaking  sides  till  they  were  exhausted they  seized  the  coveted  hatchets,  seem  to  hesitate  whether  they  should discharge  their  arrows  or  inflict  some  corporal  incision  ;  but  on  bet- ter thought  desisted,  and  then  went  away  shouting  "  Ram,"  "Ram,:> and  describing  to  each  other  the  consternation  of  the  poor  con- victs.
(These  same  "poor  convicts,  "  for  whom  Mr.  Corbyn  had  so  much sympathy,  had  only  a  few  years  before  been  doing  far  worse  to  Euro- peans of  both  sexes  in  India.  One  would  suppose  that  Mr.  Corbyn had  got  his  ideas  of  savages  from  the  accounts  of  the  North  Ame- rican Indians,  who  do  not  in  any  way  resemble  the  Andamanese.  The latter  have  many  of  the  mental  characteristics  of  the  Negro,  and  he
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
433
should  have  studied  the  accounts  of  the  Hottentots   and  the  Tasmani- ans.— M.  V,  P.)
But  other  convicts  have  not  generally  been  so  fortunate,  and  have seldom  come  away  from  such  an  encounter  without  some  mark  of  the meeting,  such  as  a  slit  by  a  knife  or  arrow  through  some  part  of  the body ;  but  latterly  these  atrocities  have  not  been  repeated,  and  even the  Southern  Tribe,  perhaps  from  watching  our  intimacy  with  the other  aborigines,  and  the  advantages  which  they  have  derived  from it,  have  altogether  abstained  from  acts  of  hostility.  Burmese  and other  Natives  have  met  them  occasionally  near  Haddo  and  Aberdeen and  so  far  from  showing  an  unfriendly  disposition,  the  parties  that they  have  met  have  given  them  their  bows  and  arrows,  and  sat  down in  a  familiar  and  social  way,  and  eaten  food  with  them ;  and  I  am told  that  none  of  the  many  runaway  convicts  who  have  lately returned  have  complained  of  being  assaulted  or  otherwise ill-used  by  these  islanders.  The  two  tribes  who  are  opposite  the Settlement,  though,  by  a  common  consent,  they  live  apart  and  occupy different  and  widely  distant  tracts  of  country,  occasionally  meet,  and some  of  the  Southern  Tribe  have  been  seen  in  the  woods  and  at  the encampments  at  the  north  of  the  island ;  but  beyond  such  occasional visits,  which  may  be  for  purposes  of  traffic  and  barter,  there  appears to  be  no  intimacy  between  them,  but  rather  jealousy  and  dislike,  if we  may  judge  from  the  feeling  which  the  small  fraternity  here manifest  towards  their  countrymen  of  the  south ;  for  they  express great  contempt  and  tell  me  that  they  are  "  no  good,"  when  I  point  to that  part  of  the  island  and  ask  them  if  they  are  not  their  "  Budolahs  " "  clansmen  "  there.  ("  Bud-ola  "  means  "  a  person  inhabiting  the same  village,"  not  "  a  fellow-tribesman."  The  description  is  very correct,  one  Sept  always  abuses  another  in  the  hope  that  the  speakers will  get  all  the  presents. — M.  V.  P.)
Some  of  them  will  shake  their  heads  dissentingly,  and  warn  me never  to  go  near  them,  declaring  that  they  will  shoot  me  if  I  do  so. Once,- when  I  was  visiting  the  encampment  beyond  North  Point,  a party  of  Andamanese  came  from  the  woods,  and  on  seeing  us  stood  at a  distance  in  a  group,  conferring  together  for  some  moments ;  when
BK
434
HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
on  a  signal  from  one  of  them,  they  all  suddenly  disappeared,  and  a Burman  convict,  who  was  with  me,  afterwards  explained  that  they were  some  of  the  other  tribe  amongst  whom  he  once  resided,  and  that the  man  who  gave  the  signal  was  their  chief  ;  that  he  (the  Burinan) formerly  made  his  escape  from  the  Settlement,  and  was  taken  and kept  a  prisoner  by  them,  but  contrived  to  effect  his  flight  ;  and  that the  chief,  when  he  observed  him  with  our  party,  pointed  to  him  and laughed,  and  exchanged  some  remarks  with  the  others  ;  whereupon, as  I  had  seen,  they  all  at  once  retreated,  fearing,  perhaps,  that  he might  recognise  them  and  have  them  apprehended  (!  ?).  I  have said  that  the  convicts  of  the  new  settlement  seemed  to  be  losing that  wholesome  dread  of  the  wild  men  of  the  woods  which  had hitherto  acted  as  a  check  (?)  upon  their  truant  propensities,  and  there was  a  curious  instance  of  this  :  —  The  other  day  in  the  singular  occur- rence of  a  female  married  convict  leaving  the  Settlement  to  try  her fortune  amongst  the  aborigines,  she,  and  some  other  convicts,  floated on  a  raft  which  they  had  constructed  to  North  Point,  and  landing there,  journeyed  along  the  coast,  till  they  came  to  an  Andamanese encampment  ;  they  remained  there  a  few  days  ;  but,  disappointed  in their  expectation  of  being  fed  and  entertained  without  cost  and trouble,  and  finding  that  the  Andamanese,  though  they  suffered  their presence,  showed  no  desire  for  their  company,  they  repented  of  their folly  and  returned  ;  and  the  woman  wisely  resolved  to  submit  ever after  to  her  fate  ;  and  it  may  be  hoped  that  her  experience  of  the discomforts  of  a  vagrant  life  will  be  a  caution  to  the  other  malcon- tents of  her  sex  who  are  rash  enough  to  suppose  that  they  can better  their  condition  by  exchanging  it  for  Gipsy  life  among  the
savages.
The  Native  convicts  have  a  foolish  notion  that  there  is  an  almost continuous  land  link  between  these  islands  and  their  own  country  ; hundreds  have  essayed  the  feat  of  trying  to  discover  such  a  passage ; and  no  reasonings,  nor  even  their  experience  of  the  invariable  and often  disastrous  failure  of  such  attempts,  can  disabuse  their  minds  of the  dearly  cherished  hallucination.  They  imagine,  too,  that  there  is a  rajah  at  the  "  Cows  "  (?  Cocos. — M.  V.  P.),  who  is  friendly  to  their
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  435
countrymen,  and  who  will  protect  and  provide  for  them,  if  they  can only  reach  the  islands.
It  is  surprising  how  far  some  of  these  escaped  convicts  wander through  the  jungles.  In  the  course  of  an  excursion  up  one  of  the creeks  above  Viper,  we  met  one  of  them  fifteen  miles  or  more  from the  Settlement,  and  by  his  own  account  he  had  been  seven  days  wan- dering about  the  woods  in  all  directions  trying  to  find  an  outlet.  He had  subsisted  during  that  time  on  berries,  unripe  fruit,  and  leaves, and  looked  miserably  emaciate  1.  The  junglees,  or  wild  man  as  he called  them,  had  made  him  eat  pork  ;  of  course  much  against  his  will as  he  was  a  strict  Mussulman;  and,  except  thai  they  pelted  him  with stones  when  he  remonstrated,  they  had  not  interfered  with  him,  but shared  their  food  with  him  and  otherwise  treated  him  kindly.
While  exploring  this  creek,  one  of  the  largest  in  the  Settlement, which  starting  about  a  mile  south  of  Viper,  runs  for  several  mile into  the  interior,  the  Burmese  convicts  we  had  with  us  sucaeeded  in catohing  two  large  pig-*,  which  they  liberally  shared  with  Topsy  and Jacko.  The  latter  presided  over  the  cooking,  and  appropriated  a  very undue  portion ;  not  content  with  helping  himself  first,  and  gorging himself  almost  to  suffocation,  he  wrapped  as  much  more  as  he  wanted in  leaves  and  hid  the  bundle  under  our  hut ;  and  again  during  the night  ate  so  plentifully  that  he  complained  the  next  morning  of  being very  unwell,  and  Topsy  had  to  bleed  him.  Topsy  and  Jacko  were very  much  alarmed  when  they  found  it  was  our  intention  to  proceed far  into  the  jungle  to  the  south,  and  did  their  utmost  to  dissuade  us. They  made  me  understand  that  we  should  encounter  an  unfriendly tribe  of  aborigines  of  whom  they  themselves  seemed  to  be  in  great dread.  (The  first  mention  of  the  Jarawas. —  T/.  T.  P.)
Jacko  pointed  to  my  heart  and  represented  the  act  of  a  savage aiming  at  me  with  his  bow  and  arrow,  of  the  arrow  piercing  my  heart and  my  falling  wounded,  closing  ray  eyes  and  expiring.  Topsy  also pathetically  enacted  the  dentil  scene,  and  both  waved  their  hands deprecatingly  in  the  direction  disapproved  of,  and  entreated  me  not  to proceed  further  but  to  return  to  the  "Burra  Chab  "  (Bara  Sahib,  i.e., "  the  Superintendent").  (  "  Katah  Deeayrdah,  Burra  Chab  tweeken  ")
8x9
436  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
(Kdto  cfa'a-da,'  liara  Sahib  (?)  "  tweeken "  is  not  known,  the  rest means  "  There  is  my  ("place,"  understood)  with  the  Superinten- dent."—^. V.  P.)
That  there  were  none  of  their  tribe  in  the  other  direction,  but  that it  was  "  Meecheymyayrdah,  Meecheymyayrdh,  "  (Michiina-da, Michima-da.— What  ?  What  ?—M.  P.P.),  a  word  which  they  fre- quently repeated  with  emphasis  and  in  a  tone  of  great  disgust.  We saw  no  one  and  returned  to  the  Settlement  two  days  after  we  had  left it.  Topsy  was  almost  beside  herself  with  joy  at  meeting  her  husband  ; he  had  been  very  uneasy  and  often  enquired  for  her  and  Jacko  during their  absence,  and  showed  by  his  manner  that  he  feared  some  harm had  befallen  them.
On  Saturday,  the  25th  July,  1863,  a  party  of  men  of  the  Naval Brigade  left  this  island  in  the  Superintendent's  cutter  to  visit  some birds'  nest  caverns  on  the  south  coast,  with  permission  to  be  absent ttvo  days.  We  heard  nothing  more  of  them  till  very  early  on  the morning  of  the  27th  an  Andamanese  canoe  with  three  naked Europeans  was  seen  some  distance  out  to  sea  making  towards  the island.  There  was  at  once,  of  course,  all  manner  of  surmises  which were  not  set  at  rest  by  the  reports  which  were  circulated  soon  after their  arrival ;  for,  the  first  supposed-to-be-authentic  intelligence which  Colonel  Tytler  received  was,  that  his  cutter  with  the  Naval Brigade  men  had  been  wrecked,  that  the  sailors  had  been  attacked  by the  aborigines,  and  some  of  them  massacred,  while  others  including the  coxswain,  Wilkinson  (so  minute  was  the  account),  were  lying wounded  and  bleeding  on  the  beach.  The  three  men  who  were  seen in  the  canoe  had  contrived  to  escape  and  brought  the  intelli- gence. Colonel  Tytler,  as  soon  as  he  espied  the  canoe  at  a  distance, conjectured  what  had  happened,  and  immediately  ordered  a  party  of armed  police  in  charge  of  a  European ;  he  also  ordered  Lieutenant Philbrick,  Commanding  the  Lady  Canning,  which  was  most fortunately  here  at  the  time,  to  make  immediate  preparations  to  start for  MacPherson's  Straits  with  an  armed  party  of  Naval  Brigade  men. There  was  great  excitement  through  the  Settlement,  every  one vowing  vengeance  on  "  those  ungrateful,  treacherous,  blood-
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  437
thirsty  savages  ".  I  was  cautioned  to  keep  those  of  them  who  were here  out  of  sight,  as  it  was  impossible  to  say  what  the  sailors  might do  to  them  in  their  rage  and  excitement ;  and,  of  course,  all  efforts for  their  good  were  pronounced  a  folly  and  delusion,  and  they  were henceforth  to  be  regarded  as  no  better  than  wild  beasts,  to  be  treated like  brutes,  and  hunted  down  and  exterminated.  But  the  real  facts, rightly  viewed,  represented  the  contrast  between  them  and  the  more civilised  and  superior  race  in  very  different  colours  ;  they  were as  follows : —
The  sailors  who  had  set  on  this  "  birds'  nesting  "  expedition  en- tered MacPherson's  Straits,  and  landed  safely  on  a  sandy  beach, about  a  mile  beyond  the  birds'  nest  caverns,  where  they  found  some Andamanese  canoes,  and  on  the  skirt  of  the  jungle  a  deserted  camp in  which  the  aborigines,  who  seem  to  have  been  scared  away  by  their approach,  had  left  the  best  part  of  their  possessions,  implements, weapons,  painted  skulls,  shell  cups,  and  numerous  other  curiosities, all  scattered  about  the  ground,  as  if  in  their  hurry  and  confusion they  had  not  had  time  to  carry  them  away  or  conceal  them.  The sailors  plundered  all  they  found — carried  their  booty  to  the  cutter, fastened  the  best  canoe  to  the  stern,  and  then  set  off  to  return  to  Ross Island.  They  were  sailing  through  a  heavy  sea,  and  unfortunately too  close  to  shore ;  for  as  they  were  turning  the  point  the  boat  struck with  violence  against  a  sunken  rock  and  immediately  capsized  ;  the crew  were  now  in  imminent  danger,  their  boat  was  carried  forward with  the  impetuous  force  of  the  waves  and  dashed  to  pieces  against the  rocks  ;  they  struggled  desperately  amongst  the  rocks  and  surf, tossed  first  forward,  then  back  again  into  the  trough  of  the  sea,  but fortunately  all  could  swim  but  one,  who  sunk  immediately  ;  but  two of  his  companions,  regardless  of  their  own  lives,  swam  to  his  assist- ance and  succeeded  in  dragging  him  to  a  rock  where  he  lay  insensi- ble ;  he  was  not  seen  again,  and  they  supposed  that  the  receding waves  had  swept  him  back  into  the  sea,  for  his  body  was  not  after- wards found,  though  a  careful  search  was  made  near  the  scene  of  the disaster ;  it  was  a  miracle  of  mercy  that  any  of  them  escaped,  but they  all,  with  this  one  exception,  succeeded  at  last  in  scrambling
438
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
up  the  cliffs  out  of  reach  of  the  waves  where  they  lay  for  some  time in  utter  exhaustion — torn,  bruised,  and  bleeding,  and  one  of  them apparently  lifeless ;  the  latter,  Wilkinson,  the  Chief  Petty  Officer, was  left  all  night  in  this  position  ;  his  companions  believing  that  he was  dead,  and  surprised,  they  said,  when  they  returned  next  morning, "to  find  him  alive  again,  "  limping  about  the  beach.  The  others climbed  to  a  plateau  on  the  cliff,  which  was  open  to  the  sea  on  one side  and  separated  by  a  ridge  of  rocks  from  the  jungle  on  the  other, and  there  they  determined  that  they  would  remain  for  the  night,  as  it afforded  not  only  a  place  of  concealment  and  natural  protection against  attack  by  the  aborigines,  but  also  the  advantage  of  being able  to  watch  and  signal  boats  and  ships  passing.  They  then  deliber- ated on  the  measures  to  be  taken  to  convey  intelligence  of  the  accident to  the  Settlement  authorities  and  procure  assistance.  It  was  hopeless to  think  of  travelling  si  many  miles  along  the  coast  over  precipitous rocks  and  through  dense  thickets  of  mangroves  ;  they  were  shoeless and  exhausted,  and  had  not  a  morsel  of  food  to  support  them.  What then  were  they  to  do  ? — they  might  remain  where  they  were  until their  protracted  absence  created  alarm,  and  assistance  was  sent  to them,  but  that  could  not  be  till  the  day  following  at  the  earliest  ; and  in  the  meantime  they  might  perish  from  hunger  or  faintness, 01  suiTer  a  worse  fate  at  the  hands  of  the  savages.  (Whom  they  had robbed  of  their  property. — M.  V.  P.)
In  this  extremity  they  resolved  upon  a  daring  and  desperate venture  ;  they  had  left  some  canoes  on  the  beach  opposite  the  abori- gines' encampment,  and  three  of  them  volunteered  to  go  down  and endeavour  to  seize  one,  and,  if  possible,  make  their  way  on  it  to Ross.  We  have  seen  how  well  this  bold  enterprise  succeeded.  They pushed  out  in  the  canoe,  turned  the  point  safely,  though  not  without some  hairbreadth  escapes,  and  guiding  themselves  as  well  as  they could  with  a  paddle,  drifted  with  wind  and  tide  along  shore,  toward tlie  Settlement.  They  had  not  gone  before  they  saw,  or  fancied  they saw,  some  of  the  aborigines  running  along  the  beach  with  torches, and,  as  they  thought,  pursuing  them  ;  large  fires  on  the  shore  showed that  they  were  encamped  there,  and  to  avoid  the  risk  of  falling
WITH  TH3  ANDAMANESE.  439
into  their  hands,  they  steered  further  out  to  sea,  but  the  tide  carried them  so  far  that  they  at  length  lost  sight  of  the  land,  and  not  know- ing in  the  darkness  what  course  to  follow,  were  altogether  at  the mercy  of  the  tide  and  wind,  which  fortunately  hlew  steadily  in  this direction,  and  so  were  driven  to  eastward  of  this  island,  where  they were  espied,  about  four  miles  off,  next  morning.  When  we  saw  the canoe,  two  of  the  men  appeared  motionless,  the  other  was  feebly guiding  it  with  a  paddle.  A  crowd  was  waiting  on  the  shore  to  assist them  when  they  landed,  and  they  needed  the  assistance, — for  what with  the  fatigues  they  had  undergone,  and  exposure  without  clothing to  rain  during  the  night,  and  want  of  food,  and  extreme  anxiety,  the poor  men  had  sunk  into  a  semi-stupor,  and  made  HO  effort  at  least  to save  themselves ;  their  canoe  struck  sideways  against  a  rock  at  some distance  from  shore  and  fell  to  pieces ;  they  tumbled  over  and  floun* dered  in  the  water,  but  were  unable  to  swim,  and  must  have  been drowned  if  some  Natives  had  not  immediately  hastened  to  their  aid and  dragged  them  on  land.  The  Lady  Canning  then  steamed down  to  the  Straits  in  about  three  hours.  We  had  not  an  opportu- nity of  visiting  the  renowned  caves  or  making  any  other  observations for  we  were  wholly  engaged,  when  we  landed,  with  assisting  the sailors  who  were  miserably  enfeebled  by  their  long  fast  and  all  the hardships  they  had  encountered.  All  were  recovered  with  the  excep- tion of  the  poor  man  who  had  perished  on  the  day  of  the  wreck ;  the fragments  of  the  cutter,  and  the  sails  torn  into  shreds,  were  lying  on the  rocks ;  but  we  could  not  approach  the  place  on  account  of  the heavy  surf.  This  unhappy  accident,  resulting  in  the  loss  of  life  of one  of  our  sailors,  has  had  one  good  effect, — that  it  has  determined  the Superintendent  to  prohibit  for  the  future  such  adventurous  excur- sions which  have,  before  now,  brought  the  Brigadesmen  into  collision with  the  aborigines,  and  have  been  followed  by  results  which  must have  increased  the  antagonism  and  hatred  of  the  latter  towards  us. (It  is  difficult  to  understand  how,  after  the  scandal  and  expose in  connection  with  the  murder  of  Pratt,  Colonel  Tytler  could  have permitted  such  an  expedition  to  be  undertaken.  The  sailors,  as  usual, behaved  as  badly  as  possible,  and  appear  to  have  disgusted  even
440  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
Mr.  Corbyn.  They  seem  to  have  been  a  poor  lot  of  men,  with  little endurance,  pluck,  or  resource,  as,  when  carefully  considered,  it  will be  seen  that  the  sufferings  they  underwent  were  small  in  comparison with  those  which  thousands  of  Europeans  in  the  cases  of  shipwrecks, or  the  African  expeditions,  have  endured  for  many  days  without  a murmur.  Mr.  Corbyn  notices  as  one  of  their  "  sufferings  "  that they  were  without  clothing  in  the  rain  during  the  whole  night.  This, with  the  thermometer  at  76°  is  no  great  hardship,  and  they  were  only without  food  for  a  little  over  a  day. — M.  P.  P.)
Until  we  fully  understand  their  language,  and  by  that  means  can impartially  investigate  their  complaints,  there  will,  in  the  progress  of their  intercourse  with  us,  be  frequent  cases  in  which  the  aborigines may  be  unfairly  represented,  and  offences  imputed  to  them  of  which, if  the  truth  oouldbe  divulged,  they  would  be  found  not  to  have  been guilty;  and,  such  being  the  case,  next  to  the  duty  of  most  zealously watching  over  them  to  protect  their  lives  and  liberty,  nothing  can  be of  greater  present  importance  with  regard  to  them  than  that  Govern- ment should  encourage,  by  every  means,  the  study  of  their  language, and  the  instruction  in  our  language  of  their  children,  who,  when  they had  acquired  a  sufficient  knowledge  of  English  or  Hindustani, would  be  the  best  medium  of  communication  with  them.
(Having  grasped  the  above  facts  so  clearly,  it  was  a  pity  that Mr.  Corbyn  did  not  apply  them  in  his  subsequent  dealings  with  the Andamanese. — M.  V.  P.)
At  first  it  seemed  as  if  their  language  was  to  be  a  perpetual puzzle  to  philologists,  and  that  at  least  much  time  would  elapse before  we  should  make  the  poor  Andamanese  understand  that  we  were seeking  inter-communication  of  ideas  and  information  with  them. For  a  long  time  every  question  that  we  put  to  them  was  repeated with  the  rapidity  of  an  echo,  and  with  most  provoking  accuracy,  till patience  was  exhausted,  and  it  seemed  hopeless  to  interrogate  them ; but  at  last  an  accidental  circumstance  discovered  to  me  the  key  by which  to  elicit  intelligible  utterances;  since  that  time  my  want  has been  understood,  and  they  have  encouraged  my  efforts  to  acquire their  language.  I  observed  some  of  the  children  curiously  examiu-
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
ing  various  articles  in  my  house  which  caught  their  attention,  and  as they  examined  each,  they  turned  towards  me  and  called  out,  with  an expression  on  their  faces  of  interest  and  curiosity,  "  Kahmeechi  Mud- dah  ?"  "Kahmeechi  Muddah  ?"  which  it  was  quite  obvious  to  me meant,  "  What  do  you  call  this  ?"  "  What  is  the  name  of  this  ?"  and when  I,  in  turn,  pointed  to  something  which  they  knew,  and  asked them  their  name  for  it,  they  instantly  replied  giving  me  the  word in  their  own  language  hy  which  they  designated  it.
(Kd  mtchitna-Aa.  "means  "What  is  this."  I  have  always  found the  children  much  more  intelligent  in  such  matters  than  the  grown-up Andamanese. — M.  V.  P.)
I  have  sometimes  been  asked  if  the  Andamanese  observe  any form  of  religion,  or  if  they  have  ever  intimated  anything  which would  argue  their  belief  in  a  God,  or  expectation  of  a  future  state  of existence  after  death.  That  they  have  such  expectations  I  have reason  to  believe  from  circumstances  which  seemed  to  me  little  short of  their  assertion  of  that  fact.  An  Andamanese  woman  had  lost  an infant  child  which  she  had  formerly  brought  with  her  to  this  island. On  her  appearing  here  one  day  without  it,  I  enquired  after  her  baby, and  asked  why  she  had  not,  as  usual,  brought  it,  when  she  replied that  it  was  dead,  and  that  she  had  buried  it  the  previous  day;  and  on further  interrogation  she  pointed  her  finger  towards  the  skies,  and said  that  baby  "was  there  "  ("Bar  lin  din  ijo  lockon  kayler"),  and then  raised  herself  and  extended  her  arm  as  if  straining  upwards,  and made  gestures  and  exclamations  which  implied  that  baby  had  gone very,  very  far  above  into  their  celestial  paradise.  Had  it  been  a  sin- gular incident,  I  should  not  have  attached  so  much  meaning  to  it,  nor perhaps  have  founded  any  opinions  of  their  belief  upon  it,  but  many other  of  the  Andamanese,  whom  I  questioned  separately  about  the deceased  infant,  repeated  the  poor  woman's  gestures  and  expres- sions.
(The  sentence  quoted  by  Mr.  Corbyn  is  not  intelligible.  The woman  may  Lave  said,  "  Bd-\&,  iji — lupo  kinyi-r6,  "  "  The  child  died very  suddenly,"  or  Bd-len,  ddijild  ow-ke"  "  The  child  ("  being  buried," understood)  I  come  back  alone.")
8  i
442
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
Their  idea  of  a  paradise,  if  I  have  rightly  interpreted  it,  is  gross in  the  extreme.  They  believe  that  it  abounds  with  pigs,  and  that their  departed  kinsmen  are  perpetually  revelling  in  the  delights  of pig-hunting  ("  rogo  deyley"),  and  repasts  on  pigs  ("  rogo  makney  ") (R6go  efc'te'-ke*  means  "  to  hunt  pigs,  ".  and  Rogo  mek-ke  to  "eat
Pigs").
Perhaps  their  expectation  of  this  their  supreme  enjoyment  makes them  face  danger  and  brave  death  with  such  reckless  intrepidity, (I  have  never  found  them  do  this.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  rather cowards. — M.  V.  P.)  They  appear  to  perform  religious  rites  at burial.  (They  do  not. — M.  V.  P.)  Their  dead  are  interred,  not burnt ;  a  grave  is  dug  about  three  feet  deep  in  which  the  body  is deposited ;  after  filling  the  grave  with  sand  and  green  leaves,  they light  a  large  fire  upon  it,  and  cover  the  ashes  with  soil ;  they  then abandon  their  encampment  which  is  invariably  also  their  burial ground  and  will  not  occupy  it  again  till  after  the  lapse  of  several months  when  the  skeleton  is  disinterred,  and  the  skull  and  other  bones are  appropriated  by  the  nearest  relative.
I  found  the  complete  bones  of  human  bodies  carefully  wrapped  in leaves  and  oOncealed  in  trees,  and  when  the  Andamanese  have  found them  in  my  possession,  they  have  been  most  eager  to  recover  them, claiming  them  as  valued  relics  of  their  friends  :  skulls,  as  is  generally known,  are  worn  as  ornaments  suspended  from  the  neck,  and  made to  serve  a  useful  purpose,  holding  the  sundry  small  articles  which they  usually  carry  about  with  them.  When  any  of  the  aborigines have  died  at  the  Andaman  Home,  their  friends  have  seemed  to  have no  further  care  for  them,  and  have  left  their  burial  to  convict servants.
(In  the  above,  two  methods  of  disposing  of  the  body  of  the  deceased are  described  ;  burial,  and  the  placing  of  the  body  on  a  platform, of  which  the  latter  is  the  more  honorable.  The  skull  is  never  used as  a  box  in  which  small  articles  are  carried.  The  reason  why  the bodies  of  those  who  died  in  the  Andaman  Home  were  neglected,  was because  the  aborigines  there  considered  themselves  to  be  in  confine- ment, and  not  permitted  to  observe  their  usual  customs,  perhaps  also
WITH  THE  ANDAMAXESE.
from  shyness.  The  subject  of  the  beliefs  of  the  Andatnanese  regard- ing a  future  state  is  too  extensive  to  be  recorded  here  in  a  note. — M.  V.  P.)
I  am  glad  to  state  that  some  of  the  South  Tribe  have  lately  been induced  to  visit  this  island  through  the  influence  of  "  Crusoe,"  who warmly  exerted  himself   in  this   instance  to   second  my  endeavours. They  had  encamped  not  far  from  Aberdeen ;  and  having  noticed  their fires  one  evening,  I  proposed  to  some  of  the  North  Tribe  in  the  Anda- man   Home  here   to  visit   them   the  following   morning,    but   they demurred  and  wished  to   dissuade  me,   representing  the  South  Tribe as  extremely  ill-disposed  to  us,  and   warning  me   that  they  would assuredly  shoot  their  arrows  at  me  if  I  landed.     When  next   morning I  approached  their  camp  with  Crusoe,  a  crowd  of  them   at   first  came down  to  the  beach,  and  Crusoe  signalled  to  them,   and  shouted  most energetically,  offering  them  bags  of  rice   and   other  grain   which  we had  taken  for  them  in  the  boat.     At  first  they  remained  on  the  beach silently  watching  us,  but  when  they   observed   our  intention  to   land near  their  encampment,  they  ran  back  to  it,  extinguished  their  fires, gathered  up    their  bundles,  and    dispersed     in  different   directions through  the  jungle.     It  seemed  useless  to  follow  them,    and  I  turned the  boat  intending  to  return  back,  but  Crusoe  begged  me  to  persevere, promising  that  if   we  would  row  along  the  coast  he  would  prevail upon  them  to  come  to  us.     Some  of  them  seeing  our  boat  turned again,  showed  themselves  on   the  shore,  and  then  a  conversation followed  between  them  and  Crusoe,   which  ended  in  their  agreeing to  remain  if  we  landed,   which   we  did.     They  wished  me  to  proceed with  them  to  a  larger  encampment  of  their  tribe  some  distance  south- ward.  I  left  the  bags  of  provisions  on  the  shore,  and  having  persuaded them  to  come  into  the  boat,  set  sail ;  but  instead  of  steering  in  the direction  which  they  wished,  when  we  were  well  out  to  sea,    I   turned the  boat  and  assuring  them  that  they  should  be   kindly   treated,  and that  they  had  no   cause   for  the  least  apprehension,  I  brought  them to  this  island.     After  setting  before  them  such  a  sumptuous  feast  of roast  pigs  and  other  approved   dainties,  as   they    had  perhaps  never before  seen,  I  loaded  them  with  presents  and  returned  next  day  with
3  i  8
444  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
them  to  their  camp,  taking  with  me  this  time  more  bags  of  graia  to distribute  amongst  their  friends.
They  were  so  delighted  with  this  treatment,  and  their  confidence  so completely  gained,  that  they  persuaded  fifteen  more  of  their  friends  to pay  a  visit  to  this  island.  Since  that  time  there  have  been  no  less than  47  aborigines  in  the  Andaman  Home,  of  whom  twenty  are children  of  various  ages.
Some  of  these  have  quickly  acquired  the  English  alphabet,  and words  of  short  syllables,  and  their  imitative  powers  are  so  remarkable that  they  soon  catch,  and  commit  to  memory,  phrases  which  they hear  spoken.
The  men  are  often  at  first  extremely  unruly,  and  I  am  continually called  upon  to  interfere  in  cases  in  which  they  would  not  hesitate  to take  the  lives  of  convicts,  or  the  Native  Guard  over  them,  if  they  per- sisted in  opposing  them.  Their  manner  of  beguiling  their  leisure  is to  sharpen  hoop  iron  into  long  blades,  of  which  I  collect  a  number every  day  to  prevent  their  using  them  against  their  Parawallahs  ;  this unpleasant  duty  is  not  wholly  without  risk,  for  they  are  extremely loath  to  part  with  any  weapon  and  are  always  inclined  to  resent  the seizure  of  it,  even  though  not  their  own,  as  a  grievous  affront  and
wrong.
The  children,  when  they  can  obtain  the  materials,  will  employ their  time  in  making  bows  and  arrows,  in  the  manufacture  of  which they  are  very  skilful,  and  in  the  use  of  them  not  less  so.  Two  of  the boys,  each  about  ten  years  of  age,  sometimes  go  along  the  rocks round  the  island  shooting  fish  with  bows  and  arrows.  I  have  seen them  leap  from  rock  to  rock  watching  for  the  fish  as  they  dart  out from  under  them,  when  with  astonishing  quickness,  and  an  aim  which seldom  misses,  they  discharge  their  arrows — which  the  next  moment are  seen  quivering  in  the  water,  and  one  of  them  plunges  in  and  drag, out  a  fish  sometimes  fifteen  or  twenty  inches  in  length  fixed  to  his arrow  point.  I  have  seen  them  obtain  in  this  way  a  large  basket  of fish  at  times,  when,  on  account  of  stormy  weather,  none  have  been caught  by  the  convict  fishermen.
They  seem  to  be  almost  as  much  in  their  element  in  the   water   as
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE  445
on  land,  and  the  feats  in  swimming  which  they  sometimes  perform are  so  extraordinary  that  they  will  hardly  be  credited.  One  man who  was  fettered  and  under  guard  at  the  Naval  Brigade  barracks escaped  one  night,  and  swam  in  his  heavy  iron  fetters  to  the  opposite mainland.
Two  of  the  Andamanese  under  my  care  left  the  Home  one  dark night  and  swam  all  the  distance  from  this  island  to  North  Point ;  and a  few  days  afterwards,  when  I  sent  a  message  to  them  inviting  them to  return,  they  swam  back  again  the  same  distance  in  the  open  day each  resting  on  a  bamboo  branch,  (the  distance  is  two  miles — M.  V.P.}, it  would  seem  from  these  circumstances  and  the  fearlessness  which they  indicate,  that  sharks,  which  abound  in  these  waters,  do  not  attack them,  for  they  would  hardly  risk  their  lives  in  so  reckless  a  manner if  experience  had  warned  them  of  such  a  danger.  (The  Andamanese are  occasionally  bitten  by  sharks  and  eaten  by  crocodiles,  but  very seldom.— M.  V.  P.)
I  am  bound  to  correct  an  erroneous  impression  of  their  habits which  I  have  inadvertently  conveyed  through  imperfect  observation. It  is  with  regard  to  the  taste  for  raw  flesh  which  is  sometimes  attri- buted to  them.  Here  they  both  boil  and  roast  their  food,  one  process following  the  other,  and  will  even  reject  it  if  it  is  not  sufficiently cooked  for  them.
I  have  found  in  the  office  records  of  this  Settlement  the  following curious  document,  which  I  transcribe  into  this  report  with  a  view  to add  to  it  information,  which  I  have  obtained  in  confirmation  of  the interesting  fact,  so  much  doubted  and  derided,  which  it  seems  to establish,  that  these  poor  people,  though  they  have  been  so  long  neg- lected, possess  mental  capabilities  not  at  all  inferior  to  others,  that, in  fact,  the  Almighty  has  endowed  them  with  faculties  which  are common  to  all  the  human  race,  and  which  have  so  long  lain  dormant in  them  only  because  the  attempt  has  not  been  made  to  bring  them into  exercise,
"  In  1835  or  1837,  whilst  between  Narcondam  and  Barren  Islands, after  a  blow  from  the  westward,  picked  up  an  Andaman  canoe  con-
A  HISTORY  OF  OUE  RELATIONS
taining  a  man,  woman,  and  two  children  (a  boy  and  a  girl),  in  a  state of  starvation,  the  boy  died  immediately  after  being  picked  up.  They were  taken  to  Penang  and  made  over  to  the  authorities  ;  after  having landed,  the  man  was  taken  very  ill.  Dr.  Bos  well,  the  Civil  Surgeon, was  bleeding  him  when  his  wife  seized  a  pot  containing  water,  and flung  it  at  his  head  ;  the  doctor  just  had  time  to  stoop  to  escape  the blow;  the  man  died;  the  gid  was  put  into  the  Free  School  and turned  out  one  of  the  cleverest  girls  amongst  them.  After  complet- ing her  studies,  she  went  under  Mrs.  Forbes  Brown  as  a  sort  of  a companion  ;  the  mother  was  placed  in  a  Penitentiary  at  Pulo  Tecoos, she  had  the  liberty  of  going  to  see  her  daughter  daily,  a  distance  of three  miles.  Mrs.  Smith,  the  schoolmistress,  was  in  the  habit  of giving  her  a  piece  of  sugarcane  which  she  was  very  fond  of.  Ladies also  gave  her  clothes  which  she  was  in  the  habit  of  tearing  up  and getting  patches  put  to  make  it  look  gaudy.  When  I  was  in  Penang last,  herself  and  her  daughter  were  alive."
H-   KINSEY,
Commanding  "  Lonacht* POET  BLAIR  ;
The  30th  November  1861.
I  have  learnt  on  good  authority  that  there  is  another  young  Anda« manese  woman  in  Penang,  who  has  been  from  infancy  with  the family  of  Mr.  Mitchell,  a  clerk  in  the  Supreme  Court  ;  that  she  has been  liberally  educated,  receiving  in  all  respects  the  same  advantages as  his  own  daughters  ;  that  she  is  an  accomplished  pianist,  studious, and  well  informed  ;  is  gifted  with  a  most  amiable  and  excellent  dis- position, and  that  her  character  and  conduct  are  most  praiseworthy and  exemplary  :  that  she  is  a  regular  and  frequent  attendant  at  the Church  services  ,  was  lately  confirmed  by  the  Bishop  of  Calcutta  ; and,  since  her  confirmation,  has  also  been  a  regular  communicant.
I  was  also  informed  that  she  is  engaged  to  be  married  to  a  Euro- pean schoolmaster  in  Penang.  Mr.  Mitchell's  brother  is  a  clerk  in the  Superintendent's  office  here,  and  he  confirms  these  statements.
WITH  THE  ANDAMAN ESE.  447
I  am  further  informed  that  another  Andamanese,  a  native  of  these islands,  is  serving  as  a  nurse  in  a  family  at  Singapore ;  she  also having  been  reared  and  educated  there,  but  nothing  more  is  stated with  regard  to  her.  I  have  also  often  heard,  though  I  am  not  aware on  what  original  authority  the  statement  rests,  that  an  Andamanese has  for  many  years  been  carrying  on  trade  as  a  Tobacconist  in  Lon- don ;  and  that,  as  his  story  is  not  known  there,  he  passes  for  a  stunted African.
H.   CORBYN.
PORT  BLAIR;   
The  6th  October  1863.
(Of  the  above  stories,  the  three  about  the  Andamanese  women  are probably  one  and  the  same,  judging  from  Major  Haughton's  account of  the  information  he  obtained  when  visiting  Penang.  It  has  often, occurred  to  me  that  some  of  the  so-called  Negro  pages,  who  seem  to have  been  so  common  in  the  Courts,  and  houses  of  the  aristocracy,  in Europe  in  the  18th  century,  may  have  been  Andamanese,  particularly as  some  of  them,  unlike  the  true  Negroes,  never  seem  to  have  grown any  bigger.  They  might  easily  have  been  taken  by  Malay  kidnap- pers from  the  Andamans  to  Atcheen,  and  from  that  centre  passed  on  in the  pilgrim  ships,  as  mentioned  by  Mr.  Hamilton,  to  the  Arabian, Egyptian,  and  Levantine  slave  markets — M.  V.  P.)
In  October  1863,  the  Hon'ble  Major-General  Sir  R.  Napier, K.C.B.,  President  in  Council,  visited  Port  Blair.  He  notes  regarding the  aborigines,  that  Mr.  Corbyn's  visit  to  Calcutta  with  them  has  had a  very  good  effect,  and  that  Mr.  Corbyn  deserves  great  praise  for  his humane  and  persevering  efforts  to  win  these  poor  people  to  civilisation, in  which  he  has  gained  their  confidence  and  affection.
He  strongly  recommended  that  an  allowance  of  not  more  than Rs.  200  per  month  should  be  granted  for  the  expenses  of  the  Anda- man Home,  with  an  expression  of  the  full  approbation  of  Government pf  Mr.  Corbyn's  services.
448
A  HISTORY   OF  OUR  RELATIONS
CHAPTER  XII.
Narrative  No.  3,  by  Mr.  Corbyn — Visit  to  Calcutta  of  the  Andamanose — Visits  to  Ran- goon, and  Moolmein,  of  the  Audamanese — Trouble  with  the  South  Tribe — Homes on  Ross  Island — Restrictions — Escape  of  Aodamanese  from  the  Homes — Death  of Topsy — Attempt  to  utilise  the  Andamanese  in  the  capture  of  runaway  convicts- Letter  from  Mr.  Corbyn — Letter  from  Major  Ford — Trouble  in  the  Homes — Grant of  8200  per  mensem  to  the  Andaman  Homes — Port  Blair  placed  under  the  orders of  the  Government  of  Burmah — Enquiry  by  the  Government  about  the  Andamanese — More  trouble  in  the  Homes — Murder  of  a  convict  by  the  Andamanese  at  the North  Outpost — Homes  closed — Major  Ford's  opinion  of  Mr.  Corbyn's  treatment of  the  Andamanese — Mr.  Corbyn  resigns  the  charge  of  the  Andamanese — Ar- rangement of  the  Homes — Review  of  Mr.  Corbyn's  management  of  the  Anda- manese.
NARRATIVE  No.  3
OP  the  Reverend  Henry  Corbyn,   relative   to   the  Aborigines   of   the Andaman  Islands.
The  present  report  is  submitted  on  account  of  His  Excellency  the Governor  General  in  Council  having  called  for  a  report  on  the  present condition  and  working  of  the  Andaman  Home.
On  the  14th  October,  1863,  I  left  Port  Blair  on  mediaal   certificate accompanied  by  eight  Andamanese,  the  prisoner  Jumbo  and   his  wife Topsy,   Jacko,  three  boys  and  two  girls.     The  weather  was  very  pro- pitious and  they  thoroughly  enjoyed  the  voyage.     Topsy  and  a  little girl,  who  were  ill  when  we  started,  quite  recovered  before  the   end  of it.     Far  from   showing   any  fear  or  misgivings  as  we  proceeded,  they looked  curiously  and  wistfully  forward,  longing   to   reach   the   place which  I  had  described  to  them  as  possessing  all  the  attractions  which imagination  could  depict  to  them,  and  daily  questioned  me   about  it. All  they  stipulated  for  was  that  we  should  all  return  together,  which I  promised  before  we  started.     On  our  arrival  in  Calcutta,   the   Com- missioner of  Police  very  kindly  placed  at  my  disposal,  for  the  use  of the   Andamanese,   a   small   house   in    the  Town  Hall  compound  con- veniently situated  near  Spence's  Hotel  where  I  had  apartments.     The news  of  our  arrival  soon  spread  amongst  the  native  population,   who
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
449
were  all  most  anxious  to  catch  a  glimps  of  the  renowned  anthropo- phagi. On  the  second  morning  after  our  arrival  the  extensive  Town Hall  enclosure  was  filled  with  a  dense  mass  of  people,  Natives,  Eura- sians, and  Europeans,  all  clamouring  for  admission  ;  and  on  entering the  rooms  where  they  lodged  I  found  them  beset  by  a  crowd  of  those rager  sight-seers ;  the  Native  part  of  the  assembly  cautiously  keep- ing at  a  safe  distance  with  a  view  to  a  speedy  retreat  if  they  mani- fested any  signs  of  giving  them  an  uncouth  reception.
Each  succeeding  day  the  crowds  increased ;  till,  at  last,  the  roads leading  to  the  Town  Hall  became  impassable  on  account  of  the  vast concourse  of  spectators  who  would  remain,  with  most  exemplary patience,  throughout  the  day  waiting  for  »n  opportunity  to  gratify their  insatiable  curiosity.  The  most  preposterous  rumours  circulated amongst  the  natives,  that  the  "  monkey-men  "  as  they  designated them,  had  long  tails  ;  that  a  pig  was  given  to  them,  and  they  would kill  it  and  eat  it  raw  on  the  Maidan  ;  that  the  woman  was  ill  and had  declared  that  nothing  would  save  her  life  but  eating  the  flesh  of a  white  man.  The  poor  woman  was,  indeed,  very  unwell,  and  the disturbance  outside  and  continual  intrusion  of  people  into  the  house were  extremely  irritating  to  her.  At  last,  as  the  crowd  could  not  be ejected,  either  by  persuasion  or  by  the  aid  of  the  police,  I  endea- voured to  effect  a  compromise  by  promising  to  let  them  see  the Andamanese  on  the  Town  Hall  steps,  if  they  would  all  leave  the compound  and  open  a  passage  for  carriages  to  pass  through  it.
As  the  mob  now  daily  increased,  and  their  curiosity  after  conti- nually seeing  the  Andamanese  was  not  in  the  least  degree  abated, it  became  necessary  to  seek  for  other  quarters  in  some  less  populous locality ;  but  here  again  another  difficulty  arose  which,  if  I  had given  sufficient  thought  to  it  before  I  left  Port  Blair,  might  have deterred  me  from  undertaking  the  laborious  enterprise  of  conducting reputed  savages  to  the  capital  of  India.  No  owner  of  a  house  would on  any  terms,  accept  the  Andamanese  as  tenants.  And  as  they  had notice  to  quit  the  building  in  the  Town  Hall  compound,  they  would soon  have  been  without  a  dwelling  had  I  not  obtained  permission  to encamp  with  them  on  the  Ballygunge  Parade  Gro-md,  which,  being
Bx
450
A  HISTORV  OF  OCR  RELATIONS
in  the  suburbs  at  some  distance  from  the  town,  was  a  situation  where the  Andamanese  could  obtain  healthy  exercise  and  combine  witli  it all  the  advantages  of  sight-seeing,  driving  into  Calcutta  without being  so  much  noticed  or  pursued  by  the  mob  who  could  no  longer be  on  the  wateh  for  them.
It  w.xs  remarked  with,  surprise  and  disappointment,  that  they never  evincel  astonishment  or  admiration  at  anything  which  they beheld,  however  wonderful  from  its  novelty  we  might  suppose  it would  appear  to  them.  "When  they  passed  through  rooms,  as  in  the Calcutta  Mint,  where  the  most  elaborate  appliances  of  machinery were  displayed  before  them  in  active  operation,  while  they  watched and  examined  the  various  motions,  not  a  sign  either  by  word  or  ges- ture escaped  them  that  sucli  wonderful  contrivances  surpassed  their comprehension,  or  that  their  magnitude  and  power  startled  and bewildered  them.
But,  in  fact,  their  undemonstrative  manner  was  not  a  sign  of  un- concern or  want  of  appreciation,  but  rather  an  indication  that  a profound  interest  was  awakened,  and  that  they  were  too  absorbed  in thought  to  give  immediate  utterances  to  the  sensations  which  objects so  far  above  their  comprehension  excited.  They  would,  afterwards amongst  themselves  interchange  their  ideas,  and  talk  for  hours together  of  what  they  had  witnessed  ;  and  sometimes  things  which appeared  at  the  time  almost  to  escape  notice,  or  to  produce  but  slight impression,  would  form  the  subject  of  most  animated  discussion  and enquiry.
Their  favourite  resort  was  the  Dhurrumtollah  market,  through which  I  often  led  them,  sometimes  not  without  some  difficulty  and risk,  on  account  of  the  pressure  of  the  crowd  attracted  by  the  famous "  monkey-men."  The  women  and  little  children  were  easily  mana»e- able,  but  the  men  and  boys  caused  me  considerable  anxiety  and trouble,  both  on  account  of  their  propensity  to  plunder,  which  not- withstanding the  liberality  with  which  all  their  wishes  were  "ratified they  would  have  indulged  with  the  most  fearless  effrontery,  an  1  in the  most  lawless  and  violent  manner,  had  I  not  restrained  them,  and also  because  of  the  thoughtless  liberties  taken  with  them  which  they
\VlTit  THE  ANDAMANESfc.  451
were  very  quick  to  resent,  especially  if  they  considered  that  an indignity  was  intendjrl.  On  one  occasion,  I  was  driving through  the  China  Bazaar  with  Jumbo  who  was  seated  opposite  to  me with  his  legs  hanging  over  one  side  of  the  carriage,  watching tyie  people  as  they  followed  us,  when  suddenly  a  Native  in  the crowd,  without  any  reason  or  provocation,  spat  upon  his  trousers . In  an  instant  his  eyes  flashed,  and  his  features  assumed  a  most  dread- ful expression  of  ferocity,  and  before  I  could  interfere,  with  one bound,  and  his  arms  flung  forward,  he  sprang  upon  the  man  who  had offered  him  the  insult.  Fortunataly,  the  crowd  stopped  tha  way  and the  man  escaped  through  an  alley ;  but  Jumbo,  wishing  to  wreak  his revenge  on  somebody,  struck  vigorously  with  his  clenched  fists  right and  left,  till  I  seized  his  arm  and  dragged  him  back  into  the  carnage. At  another  time  the  same  affront  was  offered  to  Jacko  in  the  Circular Koad  ;  and,  as  the  offender  in  this  instance  also  escaped,  he  too  vented his  wrath  upon  the  mob,  lashing  them  with  my  buggy  whip,  till  he had  completely  dispersed  them.  Unfortunately  (?)  the  Andamanese came  away  from  Calcutta  with  a  mare  contemptible  opinion  of  the Natives  than  they  had  ever  before  entertained  of  them,  which  they have  shown  in  their  tone  and  bearing  towards  them  since  they returned  to  the  Settlement.  Even  a  child,  running  into  a  crowd  of Bengalees  and  using:  menacing  gestures,  would  immediately  scatter  it ; and  it  was  natural  that  the  Andamanese,  seeing  such  displays  of timidity,  should  regard  the  whole  race  as  immeasurably  inferior  to them  in  those  qualities  which  they  most  appreciate  and  admire.
I  was  anxious  that  they  should  see  some  military  manoeuvres,  and a  parade  of  troops,  for  which  General  Showers  kindly  appointed  a  day shortly  before  our  departure  ;  but  the  intelligence  of  the  melancholy death  of  Lord  Elgin  made  it  necessary  to  postpone  it,  and  they,  there- fore, lost  the  opportunity  of  witnessing  the  imposing  spectacle.
They  frequently  visited  the  fort  and  also  the  arsenal  and armoury  ;  mutual  recognitions  passed  between  them  and  some  men of  Her  Majesty's  13th  L.  I.,  who  had  been  to  Port  Blair  on  detachment duty  and  visited  them  in  their  encampment.  They  never  forget  a face  which  they  have  once  seen.  When  Lieutenant  Gill  of  Her
3  n2
452  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
Majesty's  13th  L.  I.,  entered  the  room  where  they  lodged,  they  im- m-'diately  pointed  him  out  to  me  as  one  of  the  party  who  had  visited their  "  Boudlah,"  and  appeared  delighted  to  see  him  again  on  account of  that  circumstance.
Amongst  other  places  they  were  taken  to  the  Asiatic  Society's Museum,  in  which  they  appeared  to  recognise  different  skeletons  of animals,  and  gave  names  to  the  various  species  according  to  the  forma- tion of  the  under  jaw.  They  also  attended  a  meeting  of  the  Asiatic Society  and  at  the  Bethune  Institution.  At  the  former  the  chief subject  of  discussion  which  elicited  opposite  opinions  was  the  possibi- lity of  an  attempt  to  civilize  them,  and  one  of  the  speakers,  who doubted  its  success,  instanced  the  case  of  barbarous  aborigines  of other  countries  who  had  had  long  communication  and  intercourse  with Europeans,  who  easily  imitated  and  acquired  the  bad  habits  of  the civilized  race  without  adopting  any  of  those  which  tended  to  improve them.  But  one  cause  of  the  demoralization  and  physical  deterioration of  other  barbarous  races  which  he  mentioned,  happily  does  not  exist amongst  the  Andamanese,  namely,  the  passion  for  ardent  spirits  ;  in- deed, it  is  difficult  to  persuade  them,  even  in  sickness,  to  imbibe  any kind  of  stimulant.  It  is  true  that  they  may  hereafter  become  accus- tomed to  the  use  of  liquors  when  associating  more  with  the  people  of this  Settlement,  but  it  is  to  be  earnestly  hoped  that  our  utmost  in- fluence will  be  exercised  to  prevent  such  a  calamitous  consequence  of our  intercourse  with  them.
Besides  places  of  interest  in  Calcutta  which  they  visited,  they were  taken  to  sea  the  great  piggeries  in  Entally  which,  as  I  had  ex- pected, threw  them  into  raptures ;  they  also  went  by  railway  to Burdwan,  and,  by  the  kindness  of  the  Rajah,  were  allowed  to  see  his house  and  grounds,  and  famous  menagerie,  all  of  which  they  have never  ceased  to  speak  of  and  call  to  my  recollection.
On  the  26th  November  we  left  Calcutta,  and  reached  Port  Blair  on the  2nd  December.  A  number  of  Andamanese  were  waiting  on Ross  Island  anxiously  looking  forward  to  the  arrival  of  the  Tubal Cain  and  party  with  me,  and  great  were  the  demonstrations  of delight  when  they  saw  them  all  safely  return  again.  The  Home
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  453
became  a  scene  of  wildest  revelry,  singing  and  dancing  continuing night  and  day  for  upwards  of  a  fortnight,  during  which  all  the Calcutta  adventures  were  glowingly  related,  and  the  effect  pro- duced was  that,  day  after  day,  they  entreated  me  to  take  them  all  to Calcutta  and  had  the  option  been  offered  to  them,  the  whole  tribe would  have  been  willing  to  accompany  me.
A  most  unfortunate  occurrence  had  happened  during  our  absence. The  South  Tribe  had  been  giving  trouble  and  robbing  the  Settlement plantations  near  Haddo,  and  the  Convict  Police  had  exemplified  their zeal  by  shooting  one  man  and  wounding  a  woman.  Colonel  Tytler enquired  into  the  case,  obtaining,  however,  only  the  convict's  version of  the  story,  and  cautioned  them  to  be  more  forbearing  in  future,  and never  to  use  their  fire-arms,  except  in  self-defence  and  under  extreme necessity.  The  woman  was  brought  to  Ross  Island  and  remained  for some  months  under  my  care,  but  died  at  length  from  the  effect  of  her wounds,  which  had  been  too  long  neglected.
On  the  9th  December,  I  proceeded  with  Colonel  Tytler  to  Rangoon and  Moulmein,  six  Andamanese  accompanying  us,  who  were  required to  act  as  guides  in  our  contemplated  visit  to  some  islands  to  the northward.
Nothing  worthy  of  note  occurred  in  these  visits,  except  that,  on  the voyage,  the  Andamanese  rendered  most  useful  and  indeed  indis- pensable service  in  supplying  the  want  of  a  sufficient  crew  on  board the  Settlement  Steamer  Diana.  Through  some  unaccountable neglect  or  oversight,  the  Diana  had  left  Rangoon  on  her  voyage to  Moulmein  and  Port  Blair  without  a  sufficient  number  of  men  to work  her,  and  it  was  found  impossible  to  heave  up  the  anchor,  and  to perform  many  other  necessary  duties  of  the  ship  without  the  assist- ance of  the  Andamanese,  which,  I  am  bound  to  say,  was  cheerfully rendered,  though  they  were  severely  over-worked  and  deprived  of their  rest  at  night  through  the  exertions  imposed  upon  them.
In  the  beginning  of  this  year  (1864),  the  South  Tribe  renewed their  depredations,  but  with  much  more  caution,  avoiding  the  armed police  and  escaping  into  the  jungles  whenever  they  appeared  ;  they seemed  to  obtain  intelligence  by  some  means,  while  the  police  were
454  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
still  at  a  distance,  that  they  were  approaching.  The  latter  could  not succeed  in  finding  them,  and  never  knew  when  or  where  to  expect them,  for  they  continually  changed  their  positions  to  elude  the  police, and  appeared  successively  in  quite  different  directions  where  they knew  the  Native  convicts  would  be  least  prepared  to  receive  them. In  this  manner,  not  only  was  great  damage  done  to  the  Settlement plantations,  but  serious  loss  was  sustained  by  the  convict  self -sup- porters whose  gardens  were  completely  cleared  of  all  their  produce. Colonel  Tytler  felt  the  necessity  of  taking  effective  measures  to  oppose these  lawless  proceedings,  but  there  appeared  no  means  of  putting a  stop  to  them  without  actual  collision  with  the  tribe,  resulting,  pro- bably, in  bloodshed.  He  was  most  anxious  to  avoid  this  ;  and  I begged  him  to  enjoin  the  police  not  to  shoot  any  of  them,  but  to  lie in  ambush  and  endeavour,  if  possible,  to  capture  them.
A  few  days  following  two  of  the  ring-leaders,  known  now  as Moriarty  and  Sandys  Sahib,  were  seized,  and  Colonel  Tytler  put  them in  irons  and  placed  them  under  my  care.  As  I  had  expected,  some of  their  friends  soon  came  to  visit  them,  and  I  sent  a  message  by them  to  their  tribe  that  the  prisoners  were  to  be  kept  in  close  custody as  a  security  for  their  future  good  behaviour,  and  that  they  should be  severely  punished  if  any  of  the  Native  convicts  at  the  outposts were  again  molested.
These  measures  and  warnings  were  more  effectual  in  restraining their  aggressive  movements  than  the  slaughter  of  half  the  tribe  would have  been  ;  for,  finding  themselves  foiled  and  fearing  that  we  should retaliate  upon  the  prisoners  if  they  gave  us  further  provocation,  they left  the  neighbourhood.
On  my  second  expedition  to  Port  Mouat,  when  returning  late  one evening  through  MacPherson's  Straits,  we  saw  the  fires  of  the aborigines,  and  as  soon  as  the  steamer  was  anchored,  I  started  ia  a small  boat  to  visit  their  encampment.  We  arrived  opposite  to  it about  8  P.M.  and  hailed  them,  but  instead  of  replying  they  extin- guished their  fires  and  retreated  into  the  woods.  Topsy  and  an  Anda- manese  child,  who  were  with  me,  now  tried  their  persuasions.  They assured  the  other  aborigines  that  they  had  nothing  to  apprehend
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  455
from  us,  that  we  were  unarmed,  that  it  was  only  myself,  Myjolah, who  Lad  come  to  visit  them,  that  the  only  other  persons  in  the  boat were  the  Natire  crew,  and,  moreover,  that  we  had  coconuts  and  rice in  abundance,  and  other  presents  for  them.
These  assurances  satisfied  them,  and  they  commenced  to  wade  out towards  us,  calling  out  to  us  to  bring  the  boat  nearer;  I  replied  that this  was  impossible,  as  the  shore  was  rocky  and  my  boat  had  already struck  against  a  rock,  and  that  I  was  afraid  on  that  account  to approach  any  nearer,  and  asked  them  why  they  had  extinguished their  fires.  They  said  that  they  would  at  once  relight  them  and  come out  to  us  in  a  canoe,  and  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  they  came, — a woman  steering  with  a  paddle,  and  four  men  pulling  :  I  filled  their canoe  with  coconuts,  bags  of  grain,  beads,  knives,  looking-glasses, and  other  ]- resents  with  which  two  of  them  returned  :  the  woman and  two  men  accompanying  us  to  the  steamer.  Next  morning  I again  visited  the  camp  without  guard  or  attendants,  and  the  abori- gines, delighted  with  the  presents  which  I  had  left  with  them  the night  before,  gave  me  a  most  welcome  reception,  promising  that  if any  Europeans  'Ahboojing-eejidur)  ever  fell  into  their  hands,  they would  bring  them  to  the  Settlement.
(The  last  remark  shows  how  much  of  Mr.  Corbyn's  notes  regard- ing the  sayings  and  doings  of  the  aborigines  was  evolved  from  his own  imagination.  '•  Sojiff-ngiji-da "  means  "aborigines,"  and  tho people  were  evidently  talking  about  themselves,  he  not  understanding a  word  of  the  conversation. — M.  V.P.)
During  the  month  of  February,  1861,  the  number  of  aborigines of  both  tribes  on  the  Settlement  was  upwards  of  forty  ;  who  were daily  employed  in  work  with  Native  convicts,  (which  should  never have  been  permitted. — M.  V.  P.),  clearing  sites,  making  thatching  and bamboo  frame-work,  and  helping  in  other  ways  in  the  construction of  their  own  houses,  piggeries,  and  cattle  sheds  ;  but  soon  severe  ill- ness began  to  prevail  amongst  them,  and  various  causes  combined  to render  them  dissatisfied  with  their  condition  and  treatment  here. The  monthly  allowance  for  their  support  did  not  suffice  for  their wants,  and  Colonel  Tytler  admitted  that  in  return  for  their  labour
456
A  HISTORY  OF  OTTK  RELATIONS
which  was  quite  equal  to  that  of  Native  convicts,  they  were  even entitled  to  a  larger  allowance.  They,  moreover,  complained  of  other discomforts.  The  Andaman  Home  was  no  longer  tenantable,  and their  only  dwelling  was  a  small  cow-shed,  which  they  shared  with cattle,  sleeping  on  a  raised  bamboo  machan  above  them.
(It  is  not  understood,  when  he  saw  how  objectionable  it  was,  why Mr.  Corbyn  allowed  such  a  state  of  things.  The  Andamanese  should have  been  permitted  to  make  one  of  their  own  villages,  in  which,  in a  sheltered  spot,  they  would  have  been  perfectly  happy. — M.V.P.}
They  were  also  impatient  of  the  presence  of  a  Convict  Guard  over them,  Who  watched  and  restricted  their  movementsj  not  allowing them  the  liberty  of  walking  about  the  island  except  at  certain  times, and  attended  by  them  to  restrain  them  from  doing  any  mischief. Four  of  them  died  here ;  but  still  nothing  could  be  done  to  improve their  quarters,  (!)  or  better  their  condition.  (All  this  is  not  under- stood. Certain  subsequent  correspondence  snows  that  Mr.  Corbyn and  the  new  Superintendent  Major  Ford  were  not  on  good  terms, but  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  Major  Ford  was  not  anxious  to treat  the  aborigines  well  ;  indeed,  a  letter  of  his  quoted  below  shows that  he  did  not  approve  of  the  repression  exercised  over  the  Anda- manese by  Mr.  Corbyn. — M .  V.P.}
The  South  Tribe  men  were  continually  instigating  the  others  to escape ;  (Escape  from  what  ?  Mr.  Corbyn  has  hitherto  said  that they  were  under  no  restrictions. — M.  V.  P.),  and  at  length,  not- withstanding the  utmost  vigilance  of  the  guard,  the  prisoners, as  well  as  nearly  all  the  others,  succeeded  in  doing  so ;  one  of the  former,  Sandys  Sahib,  swimming  in  his  irons  to  the  main- land, and  only  Jumbo  and  Topsy  were  left,  and  finally  they  also escaped  (!),  and  the  latter  most  unfortunately  was  drowned  in attempting  to  swim  to  the  mainland.  Such  a,  finale  of  all  our  hopes and  efforts  was  indeed  melancholy  and  disheartening,  and  every  one predicted  that  we  should  see  nothing  more  of  the  Andamanese,  and that  it  was  hopeless  to  attempt  to  do  anything  more  with  them.  But I  renewed  the  attempt,  supported  and  encouraged  by  Major  Ford  in doing  so.  It  occurred  to  me  that  as  soon  as  the  North  Tribe  knew
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  457
that  Jumbo  had  escaped  (!)  they  would  decamp  and  go  to  some  other part  of  the  islands,  and  it  was  therefore  desirable  to  see  them,  and endeavour  to  persuade  some  of  the  more  influential  of  them  to  return to  the  Settlement  before  they  had  ascertained  this  circumstance, which  would  not  be  for  several  days,  as  Jumbo  had  swam  from  this island  to  the  south  of  Aberdeen,  and  would  therefore  be  many  days journeying  so  far  as  the  North  Tribe  encampment.  In  pursuance of  this  design,  I  went  to  the  jungles  supplied  with  a  week's  provi- sions, and  took  up  a  position  on  the  coast  about  eight  or  nine  miles northward,  where  I  remained  five  days.  The  plan  quite  succeeded  ; for  I  drew  round  me  several  Andamanese,  and  at  last  Jumbo  also came  into  my  encampment,  and  he  and  the  rest  returned  with  me  to Ross  Island.
I  am  happy  to  state  that  now  the  good  understanding  with  them has  been  completely  restored,  and  we  are  on  the  best  of  terms  with them.  Jumbo  was  kept  here  a  few  days  and  then  sent  back  to  the mainland,  and  he  now  by  his  own  wish  remains  at  the  North  Out- post Home  established  for  them  on  the  mainland.  All  the  others who  formerly  escaped,  including  the  prisoners  Moriarty  and  Sandys Sahib  of  the  South  Tribe,  are  at  the  present  moment  on  this  island, all  having  returned  of  their  own  accord,  in  number  thirty-eight,  but no  longer  under  any  restriction  (!)  for  they  are  not  watched  by parawallahs,  and  are  at  liberty  to  return  to  the  mainland  and  their own  homes  whenever  they  are  so  disposed, — a  liberty  of  which  they freely  avail  themselves,  but  do  not  leave  us  altogether,  for  they generally  return  after  a  few  days'  absence,  swimming  across,  or  in canoes  which  I  have  provided  for  them.
As  soon  as  a  ship  now  appears  in  port  they  swim  to  it  and  beg for  plantains  ;  and  if  pice,  of  which  they  now  know  the  use  and  ap- preciate the  value,  are  thrown  to  them,  they  dive  to  a  great  depth for  them, — even  the  small  children  being  very  successful  at  these feats.
We  are  making  some  use  of  them  now  in  trying  to  recover  escaped convicts  by  their  means,  and  though  the  experiment  has  not  yet  been quite  successful,  there  is  sufficient  reason  to  hope  that  it  will  be ;  and
3    N
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
the  convicts,  amongst  whom  the  report  has  already  spread  that  we are  sending  the  aborigines  into  the  jungles  after  runaways,  will  be deterred  from  trying  to  escape,  by  fear  of  having  such  rough  police to  deal  with,  and  we  may  hope,  therefore,  that  much  less  will  now be  heard  of  such  escapes  which  have  been  so  frequent  lately.  Crusoe and  another  man  of  his  tribe  were  sent  southward,  by  Major  Ford's desire,  to  search  for  three  Burmans  who  had  not  been  heard  of  for a  month,  and  one  of  whom  left  armed  with  a  musket.  A  written order  closed  and  sealed  in  which  the  Burmans  were  required  to  return immediately,  and  informed  that  the  Aadamanese  had  be^n  sent  in search  of  them,  was  put  into  Crusoe's  hands,  and  he  was  told  to deliver  it  to  them.  I  then  took  him  to  the  South  Outpost  Home, gave  in  charge  of  the  Tolidar  of  that  Outpost  beads,  knives,  and other  presents,  which  Crusoe  was  informed  were  to  be  given  to  him as  soon  as  he  returned  with  the  convicts  ;  and  having  supplied  him and  his  companion  with  rice  for  seven  days  consumption,  a  cooking pot,  box  of  matches,  and  also  bows  and  arrows,  which  I  cautioned them  on  no  account  to  use  against  the  Burmans,  despatched  them on  their  mission.  In  three  days  they  returned  without  the  Burmans whom  they  declared  they  had  searched  for  in  vain  all  over  the  main- land, but  dragging  after  them  an  unfortunate  convict  self-supporter whom  they  had  found  some  distance  to  the  south,  hunting  pigs,  and threatened  to  shoot  if  he  did  not  im  aodiately  follow  them.  Crusoe claimed  the  reward  which  the  Tolidar  refused,  telling  him  that  he had  not  earned  it,  as  the  Bengalee  before  them  was  not  a  runaway and  evidently  not  a  Barman.  (Crusoe  should  have  been  given  a reward.  —  M,  V.  P.)  I  doubt,  however,  if  Crusoe  went  so  far  to  the south  as  was  pretended,  for  others  whom  I  wished  to  accompany  him demurred,  fearing  to  encounter  a  tribe  in  the  south,  whom  they  call "  Jarrahwadder  "  (Jarawa-da),  their  name  for  their  own  tribe  is "  Eleahwadder  "  (not  understood,  ?  "descended  from  Chdna  file- wadi),  and  for  the  natives  of  the  Archipelago  Islands  "  Ballawadder". (Balawa  da);  —  the  latter  they  describe  as  not  having  a  language,  and being  extremely  ferocious;  they  are  a  tribe  of  whom  absolutely nothing  is  known.
WITH  TBE  ANDAMANESE.  459
(Here  Mr.  Corbyn  has  evidently  misunderstood  Crusoe,  who  pro- bably told  him  that  the  Balawa-da  did  not  talk  the  language  he  did. They  are  the  mildest  of  all  the  tribes,  and  were  known  to  the  Aka- .Zte'a-da,  whom  they  used  to  meet  at  Kyd  Island. — M.  V.  P.)
A  very  creditable  act  of  humanity  on  the  part  of  the  North  Tribe aborigines,  which  was  lately  related  to  me  by  a  Native  convict  who was  the  object  of  it,  deserves  to  be  recorded.  This  man,  a  Punjabee boatman,  escaped  from  this  Settlement  with  some  other  convicts  in November,  and  travelled  many  miles  northward  till  they  came  to  a clearance  in  the  interior,  as  extensive,  he  says,  as  Chatham,  whore was  a  large  Andamanese  encampment.  (No  such  clearance  existed. — M.  V.  P.)
Here  these  convicts  remained  a  few  days,  kindly  treated  by  the aborigines,  but  he  became  very  ill  and  his  companions  left  him.  The Andamanese,  more  merciful  than  the  convicts,  administered  various remedies  and  treated  him  most  kindly,  and  finding  that  he  showed no  symptoms  of  recovery,  three  of  them  took  him  up  and  bearing him  upon  their  shoulders  carried  him  every  day  considerable  distances along  the  coast  till,  in  eight  days'  march,  they  brought  him  to  North Point.  Arrived  there,  they  hailed  a  boat  and  asked  the  boatmen  to bring  them  also  to  Ross  Island,  but  their  request  was  refused,  and they  went  away  unrequited  for  an  act  of  mercy  which  cannot  be too  much  extolled,  or  too  long  remembered  in  their  favour.  (If true.— M.  V.  P.)
I  have  already  made  allusion  to  the  establishment  of  two  Outpost Homes  on  the  mainland,  the  object  of  which  is  to  promote  intercourse and  friendly  intimacy  with  the  aborigines.  Clearances  of  land  have been  made,  and  two  buildings  erected.
I  have  hopes  of  our  being  able  to  induce  the  Andamanese  to  cul- tivate the  soil  and  render  other  useful  services  to  us.
H  CORBYN.
PORT  BLAIR ; The  16th  May,  1864.
3  K  2
460
A  HISTORY  OF  OCR  RELATIONS
(This  cultivation  of  the  soil  by  the  Andamanese  has  been  an  ignis fatuus  to  many  officers.  It  is  impossible  to  turn,  by  an  order,  or  in a  few  years,  or  even  in  one  generation,  a  hunting  and  nomadic,  into  a pastoral  people.  The  labour  of  clearing,  and  keeping  cleared,  the jungle  would  be  far  too  great  for  the  Andamanese.  They  prefer,  as food,  the  products  of  the  chase  to  the  products  of  the  soil,  and  their  dirty habits  do  not  permit  them  to  remain  very  long  in  one  place. — M.V.P.)
The  following  letter  shows  the  circumstances  which  led  to  the application  for  the  present  grant-iu-aid  of  R200  per  mensem  to  the Andaman  Borne
Letter,  No.  19,  from  the  Revd.  Henry  Corbyn,  Chaplain  of Port  Blair,  to  Major  13.  Ford,  Officiating  Superintendent  of  Port Blair.  Dated,  Ross  Island,  the  20th  May,  186 L
"  Ths  expenses  of  supporting  the  Andamanese  under  my  care having  greatly  increased,  since  the  establishment  of  two  Homes  for them  on  the  mainland,  I  am  obliged  to  beg  of  you  to  render  me increased  assistance  in  carrying  out  the  views  and  wishes  of  Govern- ment for  their  civilization,  pending  the  reply  of  Government  to  my application  for  a  larger  allowance.
"  On  the  date  of  my  last  report  to  Government,  16th  instant, there  were  no  less  than  thirty -eight  aborigines  of  the  North  and South  Tribes  on  this  island,  dependent  on  the  funds  of  the  Home  for their  diet  and  clothing  ;  and,  in  addition  to  these,  forty  have  to  be daily  fed  on  the  mainland  on  grain,  purchased  at  the  Commissariat -stores,  at  a  cost  quite  equal  to  that  of  the  laboring  convicts.
"  It  cannot  be  expected  that,  with  all  the  other  miscellaneous expenses  of  the  Home,  I  can  continue  to  support,  in  food  and  clothing, such  a  large  and  daily  increasing  number  of  the  aborigines  on  the present  monthly  allowance ;  the  expense  of  clothing  them  alone would  be  so  considerable  an  item  that,  in  consequence  of  my  inability to  meet  it,  many  of  them  are  obliged  to  go  naked.  (There  could  have been  no  need  to  feed  the  people  on  the  mainland  on  grain.  The  only reason  why  the  Andamanese  in  the  Homes  at  the  present  day  are  fed by  the  Home  is  because  their  time  is  taken  up  in  working  for  the
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  451
Government,  and  they  have  no  leisure  to  procure  their  own  food. Also  a  small  loin  cloth,  which  would  not  have  been  very  expensive, would  have  been  ample  clothing  for  the  savages,  for  whom  too much  clothing  is  not  desirable — M.V.P.}
"  You  will  have  seen,  from  my  accounts  rendered  to  you,  how large  a  sum  I  have  advanced  out  of  my  own  private  funds  to  defray expenses  already  incurred  on  behalf  of  the  Home, — incurred,  it  is true,  on  my  own  responsibility,  but  with  views  and  for  objects  which I  believed  the  result  would  justify,  and  Government  would  at  some future  time  approve,  so  persuaded  was  I  of  their  importance  that,  if it  haa  been  necessary  to  have  incurred  those  expenses  without  aid from  Government,  I  should  not  have  hesitated  to  do  so  ;  and  indeed, it  will  be  soon  from  my  accounts  that,  though  the  expenses  of  the  Home commenced  in  the  month  of  June,  no  part  of  the  Government allowance  was  paid  to  me  till  late  in  November,  when  I  received R100,  and  again  on  the  8th  December,  five  months  arrears  of  allow- ances  due,  which  could  not  be  drawn  sooner  because  it  hadnot  been sanctioned.
"  I  am  sure  Government  will  not  wish  me  to  sustain  more  pecu- niary Joss,  through  my  having  voluntarily  undertaken  duties  which, in  themselves,  are  sufficiently  onerous.
"  Before  my  application  for  an  increased  allowance  to  the  Home can  be  laid  before  Government  and  their  reply  received,  much  time will  elapse.  In  the  meantime,  I  b3g  of  you,  as  the  Superintendent of  this  Settlement,  to  render  me  all  possible  assistance  in  meeting the  demands  of  our  improved  relations,  and  advancing  intercourse with  both  tribes  of  the  aborigines  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the Settlement.
"  Should  you  not  feel  authorized  to  render  pecuniary  aid,  in  anti- cipation of  Government  sanction,  there  are  other  ways  in  which you  can  materially  help  to  diminish  the  expense  of  the  Home,  and  to support  the  aborigines.
'*  I  beg  leave  to  indicate  some  of  them —
<(  1st. —  It  is  advertised  that  there  will  be  a  sale  by  auction  next Wednesday,  at  the  Commissariat  Store-rooms,  of  "  cargo  rice  "  in-
462  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
tended  for  the  Government  elephants,  but  now  not  required,  which is  unfit  for  convicts'  food,  (though  if  the  bazaar  convicts,  self-support- ing "bunneahs,"  buy  it,  they  will  probably  sell  it  again  to  the labouring  convicts,  mixed  with  good  rice),  but  would  be  very  much appreciated  by  people  like  the  aborigines,  who  are  accustomed  to coarse  fare,  and,  therefore,  are  not  so  likely  to  be  impaired  in  health by  it.  As  it  is  expected  that  this  rice  will  not  realise  one-fourth  of  its value,  its  sale  would  be  a  loss  to  Government,  but  its  distribution amongst  the  poor  Andamanese  would  serve  a  useful  and  merciful purpose.
"  2nd. — I  have  also  heard  that  there  will  soon  be  condemned bullocks  for  disposal  ?  These  would  be  of  great  use  to  the  Andamanese on  the  mainland.
"  3rd. — All  cattle  which  die  from  disease,  or  other  natural  causes, might  be  seut  to  the  outposts  for  their  sustenance.  Colonel  Tytler formerly  issued  an  order,  which  has  not  been  carried  out  for  many months  past,  that  all  cattle  dying  naturally,  after  being  landed  on this  Island,  should  be  forthwith  conveyed  to  the  mainland  and  left there  for  the  .aborigines.
"  I  am  happy  to  inform  you  that  the  aborigines  at  North  Outpost have  quite  altered  their  manner  and  behaviour  towards  the  convicts there.  The  Tolidar  informs  me  that  they  give  them  more  than  they take  from  them,  sharing  with  the  convicts  fruit  which  they  bring  in from  the  jungles,  and  fish  of  considerable  size,  three  or  four  feet  in length,  which  they  obtain  in  great  abundance.  He  is  now  gently  and gradually  leading  them  to  work  ;  and  endeavouring  to  make  them  un- derstand that  they  must  earn  the  food  which  we  give  them  ;  they  still continue  to  bring  their  bows  and  arrows,  but  only  to  shoot  fish  with."
Major  Ford,  in  forwarding  the  above  letter,  and  Mr.  Corbyn's third  Narrative  to  the  Government  of  India,  writes  in  letter No.  20A.,  dated  the  6th  June,  186k—
"  I  have  the  honor  to  forward,  enclosed,  the  continuation  of Mr.  Corbyn's  third  Narrative,  which  takes  up  his  account  of  events occurring  with  the  Andaman  tribes  during  February  last,  on  the  15th
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  453
of  which  month  I  assumed  officiating  charge  of  this  Settlement.  Mr. Corbyn  records  now,  that,  shortly  afterwards  the  Andamanese,  who I  found  here,  some  forty  in  number,  including  women  and  children, all  escaped  to  the  mainland,  swimming  over  to  North  or  South  Points; it  was  in  the  last  attempt  of  this  kind  that  Topsy,  (the  wife  of  Jumbo), who  had  often  before  evinced  a  most  friendly  and  trusting  disposition towards  the  British,  was  drowned  ;  her  body  was  found  a  day  or  two
after  at  South  Point,   she  had  been  in  ill-health  and  most  probably
had  not  strength  to  gain  the  opposite  shore.
2.  "After   carefully  considering  all  circumstances  connected  with these  escapes,  and  having  previously  observed  the   system   hitherto adopted  for  the  management  of  the  Andamanese  here,  I  came  to  the conclusion   that  it  wns  impolitic  to  restrain  them  on  Ross  Island  ; that  they   must  be   free  to   go  and  come  amongst  us  ;    but  as  this might  in  time,  and  as  confidence  increased,  lead  to  the  visits  o£  larger numbers  than  it  would   be  safe  to  have  here  on  Ross  Island,   and whose  care   and  attendance   would   involve  a  larger   expenditure  of convict  labour  and  duty  than  the   Settlement,   with  such   a  press  of public  works  as  is  at   present  the   case,  can  afford,  I  determined  for these  and  some  other  considerations,  all  adding  weight  to  my  decision, but  not  necessary  to  record  here,  to  cause  two  outpost  '  Homes  '   to  be formed,  and   accompanied  by   Mr.   Corbyn,  selected  two  localities, each   at   the  head  of  a   small  cove, — one  on  the    north,  and  the other  on  the  south  mainland  shore,  situated  at  about  the  same  distance (three  or  four  miles)  from  Ross  Island,  where,  at  each,  I   have   given materials   for   the  construction   of   a  large   hut,   and  have  stationed two  armed  police,  and  a  small  working  party  ;   some  six  (from  the Andaman  Home)  orderlies  who  have  been  accustomed  to,  and  get on  well  with,  the  aborigines,  and  a  small  boat  for  their   communica- tion.   Here  they  have  been  supplied  with  as  took  of   provisions,  a few  presents,  etc.,  with  which  they  feed  and  conciliate  any  Anda- manese visitors;  any  of  whom,  wishing  to  visit  Mr.  Corbyn  or  myself, are  at  liberty  to  find  their  way  over  to  Ross  in  a  small  canoe  stationed at  each  out-post  for  this  purpose.     They  are  then  allowed  to  stay  a day  or  two,  if  they  like,  at  the  Andaman  Home,  which  I  have  removed
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
from  the  old  site  to  one  more  under  Mr.  Corbyn's  eye,  and  not  quite so  public,  —  a  necessary  arrangement,  having  now  several  married Christian  women  here.  It  will  be  necessary  temporarily  to  withdraw or  reduce  the  strength  of  the  party  at  the  outposts  during  the south-west  monsoon,  when  bad  weather  may  often  render  it  a  matter of  difficulty  to  keep  up  supplies  of  food,  etc.,  for  a  large  party,  as  also to  provide  medical  aid.
"  3.  As  stated  by  Mr.  Corbyn,  I  have  endeavoured  to  utilise  the Audamanese,  by  trying  through  them  to  recapture  some  recently escaped  convicts  ;  they  have  not  as  yet  been  successful,  it  is  some- thing, however,  to  have  got  them  to  understand,  as  they  now  do, that  I  will  reward  them  for  bringing  in  anyone  who  they  find  beyond our  Settlement,  if  they  briag  him  unharmed.
"  4i.  In  conclusion,  I  beg  to  bring  to  the  favourable  notice  of Government,  the  unwearied  exertions  of  Mr.  Corbyn  to  improve our  good  understanding  with  the  people  of  these  islands,  —  in  so  doing I  beg  to  submit  a  copy  of  his  letter  to  me,  urging  an  increase  to  the Andaman  Home  allowance  to  B200  a  month,  which  1  beg  respectfully to  recommend  may  be  granted,  —  principally  that  he  may  have  some m^ans  wherewith  to  start  a  school  for  such  Andamanese  children whose  parents  can  be  induced  to  let  them  remain  somewhat  longer  on Ross  Island,  where  I  propose  it  should  be  established  ;  and  which  will doubtless,  be  a  further  means  towards  the  civilizing  of  these  people, and  extending  our  influence  amongst  their  tribes."
(It  was  afterwards  found  that  a  school  on  Ross  Island  was  a  mis- take, as  the  children  were  too  closely  associated  with  the  soldiers  and convicts,  and  learnt  to  drink,  and  a  number  of  other  bad  habits.  — M.  V.  P.)
It  is  due  to  Mr.  Corbyn  that  his  own  accounts  of  his  dealings  with the  Andamanese  should  be  giren,  and  I  therefore  publish  them  in full,  but  on  Major  Ford  taking  charge  of  the  Settlement  he  found  it necessary  to  make  changes  in  the  Andaman  Home  which  led  to Mr.  Corbyn's  resignation  of  the  charge  of  it,  and  on  the  22nd  June, 1864,  Mr.  J.  N.  Homfray  was  appointed  to  the  charge  in  his  place.
WITH  THK  ANDAMANESE.
405
What  should  have  led  Mr.  Corbyn  to  suspect  that  all  was  not going  well  in  the  Home  was  that,  on  the  1st  March,  1864,  all  the Andamanese  who  had  been  staying  in  it  escaped  by  swimming  to  the mainland.  Mr.  Corbyn  went  to  the  northward  in  the  Diana  to look  for  them  and  caught  five  of  the  Northern  Tribe,  and  one  of  the Southern,  thus  showing  that  he  considered  them  to  be  under  some sort  of  restraint.  On  the  10th,  the  officers  of  the  Diana  bad  a friendly  interview  with  some  of  the  Southern  Tribe,  and  it  became evident  that  they  did  not  dislike  us  personally,  but  they  objeated  to the  semi-captivity  in  which  they  were  kept  on  Ross  Island.
On  the  26th  March,  1864,  the  dead  body  of  an  Andamanese woman  was  found  lying  on  South  Point  beach.  The  remains  could not  be  identified,  but  were  said  at  the  time  to  be  those  of  Topsy,  the wife  of  Jumbo,  who  had  done  so  much  good  service  for  us.  She  was in  ill-health  when  she  escaped  from  Ross,  and  is  believed  to  have  bee  a drowned  in  swimming  across.
Mr.  Corbyn  remarked  that  ib  was  very  difficult  to  induce  the Andamanese  to  remain  with  us.  Jumbo  was  put  in  irons  by  him  for running  away,  and  swam  across  to  the  mainland  in  these.  Major Ford  objected  to  this  restraint,  or  to  irons  being  put  on  the  Anda- manese at  all,  and  opened  two  Homes  for  the  aborigines  on  the  main- land, at  Lekera-Barnga,  and  South  Corbyu's  Cove.  Three  trusty convicts,  accustomed  to  the  Andamanese,  were  kept  in  these,  and  a store  of  condemned  grain,  biscuits,  etc.,  to  be  used  as  presents.  Any Andamanese  who  came  to  these  Homes  was  allowed  to  remain  as  long
O
as  he  liked,  and  was  fed.  If  the  aborigines  wanted  to  come  to  Ross, on  lighting  a  signal  fire  at  the  nearest  point  opposite  on  the  mainland, a  canoe  was  sent  over  for  them.
On  one  occasion  Major  Ford  went  in  the  Diana  to  North  Bav and  was  hailed  by  two  "runaway"  Andamanese  women,  Harriett  of the  South  Tribe,  and  Annie  of  the  North  Tribe,  who  willingly  came on  board,  and  went  on  to  Port  Meadows,  Middle  Strait,  Port  Camp- bell, Port  Mouat,  Redskin  Island,  where  there  had  shortly  before been  a  friendly  meeting  between  our  people  and  the  Andnmanese of  the  South  Tribe,  and  Jollyboys'  Island.  The  party  returned
3  o
466
A  HISTOYR  OF  OUR  RELATION'S
through  MacPherson's  Straits.  Very  few  Andamanese  were  seen  on this  trip,  but  those  who  were  met  with  (and  who,  of  course,  were  all members  of  the  Aka- Sea-da,  tribe)  were  all  friendly.
At  this  time  an  allowance  of  R200  per  mensem  for  the  Andaman Homes  was  granted  by  the  Government  of  India  in  Letter  No.  1670, dated  28th  July,  1864.
During  the  months  of  December,  1863,  and  January,  1864,  the summit  of  Mount  Harriet  was  cleared,  and  a  road  made  to  it.  The Government  of  India  enjoined  great  caution  on  all  the  parties employed  on  this  work,  and  ordered  that  any  collection  of  Andaman- ese in  their  neighbourhood  should  be  discouraged  as  much  as  possible and  intercourse  with  them  prevented  when  not  indispensable,  as, seeing  the  tools  in  use,  the  Andamanese  would  be  tempted  to  steal them,  and  thus  disputes  would  be  caused.
On  the  2nd  April,  1864,  the  Settlement  was  placed  under  the orders  of  the  Chief  Commissioner  of  British  Burmah,  and  attached  to the  Tenasserim  Commissionership  ;  and  on  the  7th  of  the  month, Major  General  the  Hon'ble  Sir  R.  Napier,  K.C.B.,  visited  Port  Blair officially.  He  approved  of  what  was  being  done  with  regard  to  the aborigines.  Towards  the  end  of  1863  the  treatment  of  the  Andaman- ese by  Mr.  Corbyn  seems  to  have  suffered  some  unexplained  change. The  attention  of  the  Government  was  drawn  to  this  on  the  15th January,  1864,  when  they  note  that  they  had  formerly  thought  that the  Andamanese  under  Mr.  Corbyn  were  remaining  voluntarily  in  the Settlement,  and  consider  it  doubtful  whether  any  good  can  be  ex- pected from  forcibly  detaining  the  people,  as  it  now  appeared Mr.  Corbyn's  object  to  do.  Major  Ford  was  requested  to  report  on  the line  of  conduct  Mr.  Corbyn  had  now  adopted  towards  these  Anda- manese, the  majority  of  whom,  it  will  be  remembered,  were  originally induced  by  friendly  overtures  to  come  into  the  Settlement.
It  would  seem  as  if  Mr.  Corbyn  was  impatient  with  the  Anda- manese for  not  more  readily  taking  to  the  mode  of  life  he  prescribed for  them,  and  for  adhering  to  their  own  customs  ;  and  he  endeavoured by  restraint  and  harsh  treatment  to  compel  them  to  do  as  he  wished.
On  the  31st  May,   1864,  the  Government  of  India  further  note
WITH  THE  ANDAMANKSE.
that  Jumbo  had  been  put  in  irons  for  running  away,  and  entirely  dis- approve of  this  proceeding.
They  directed  Mr.  Corbyn  to  submit  a  Report  of  his  proceedings with  the  Andamanese  every  moath,  and  he  somewhat  surprised  them by  remarking  that,  "  making  friends  with  the  Andamanese  increased the  number  of  escapes,  as  the  convicts  could  now  wander  anywhere with  impunity."  The  Government  at  once  called  on  the  Superinten- dent for  a  report  on  this  matter,  and  Major  Ford  suggested  that  the Andamanese  should  be  encouraged  to  recapture  the  runaway  convicts, and  bring  them  in  unharmed,  and  that  a  reward  should  be  given  for every  convict  so  brought  in.
This  suggestion  was  acted  on  from  then  till  the  present  day,  and the  Andamanese  in  return  for  the  benefits  and  attention  they  have received  from  us,  have  acted  as  a  sort  of  jungle  police.
Mr.  Corbyn,  however,  objected  to  this  proposal,  on  the  ground lhat  it  would  give  the  Andamanese  a  "  police  control  "  over  the  con- victs, and  they  would  then  ill-use  them,  and  let  loose  "  their  worst passions."  In  the  meantime,  an  occurrence  took  place  at  the  North Outpost  which  caused  all  friendly  relations  with  the  Andamanese  to be  broken  off.  On  the  12th  June,  1861,  two  of  the  Andamanese  visit ing  at  the  North  Home,  got  angry  with  the  Sub-Gangsman  in  charge there,  because  he  would  not  give  them  all  the  food  they  wanted,  and going  out  of  the  hut  they  were  in  with  him,  fired  on  him,  wounding him  twice  ;  from  the  effects  of  these  wounds  he  subsequently  died. The  Andamanese  then  ran  away,  and  fired  on  some  other  convicts who  were  in  their  path,  wounding  one  of  them  ;  these  convicts  closed round  them  to  prevent  their  escape,  when  they  wounded  three more,  and,  dropping  their  bows  and  arrows,  eluded  the  remain- der and  fled  into  the  jungle.  One  of  these  wounded  men  also  died from  the  effects  of  his  injuries.  The  Andamanese  aggressors  were Jacko  and  Moriarty,  who  had  always  been  well  treated  by  us.  There were  other  Andamanese  men,  and  also  women  and  children  present, but  they  took  no  part  in  the  affair  which  was  entirely  confined  to  the above-mentioned  two.  Major  Ford  intended  to  keep  a  small  party at  these  outpost  Homes  during  the  south-west  monsoon,  but  owing
3  o  2
468  •*•  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
to  this  occurrence  he  closed  them  altogether,  and  withdrew  the  con- victs stationed  there.  He  further  ordered  that  no  favour  of  any  kind should  be  conferred  on  the  Andamanese,  and  that  these  who  visited us  for  the  next  three  months  should  be  treated  with  coldness.  He stated,  in  reporting  the  matter  to  the  Government  of  India,  that  this occurrence  was  much  to  be  regretted,  as  the  Andamanese  were  appa- rently never  before  so  friendly.  He  objected  to  their  restraint  on Ross,  and  said  that  the  Andaman  Home  had  to  be  removed  from  its public  position,  on  account  of  the  Christian  women  on  Ross  who  were offended  by  the  sight  of  the  Andamanese,  and  had  been  put  in  a  more private  place,  under  Mr.  Corbyn's  eye.  On  the  30th  July,  ]>6i,  the Andamaoese  wished  to  resume  friendly  rslations,  but  food  was  refused to  all  except  children.  After  the  affair  at  North  Camp  on  the  12th June,  they  sent  over  two  children  to  Mr.  Corbyn  and  these  were allowed  to  be  fed,  and  were  then  sent  away.  This  was  evidently  a "feeler"  on  the  part  of  the  Andamanese,  and  was  seen  to  be  so  by Major  Ford,  who  did  not  approve  of  it.  Tha  next  day  Jumbo  and Jacko  swam  over,  and  Mr.  Corbyn  wanted  to  arrest  them,  but  as  we had  attracted  them  by  our  own  act  on  the  previous  day,  of  giving food  to  the  children,  Major  Ford  refused  to  allow  this  as  it  would  look like  treachery.  He  also  refused  Mr.  Corbyn's  request  to  give  them food,  and  ordered  them  to  be  taken  to  the  beach  and  told  to  go.  Mr. Corbyn  said  that  they  told  him  that  neither  of  them  had  anything  to do  with  the  North  Camp  affair,  but  Major  Ford  replied  that  Tolidar Gilbur  Singh,  with  his  dying  breath  had  said  that  Jacko  shot  him. It  also  appeared  afterwards  that  Jacko  was  the  mail  who  had  shot Pratt,  for  which  Jumbo  and  Snowball  were  unjustly  punished. While  this  was  going  on,  a  party  of  about  twenty  Andamanese  were swimming  over  from  North  Point  to  Ross,  and  being  met  by  these two  returning,  all  of  them  turned  back  to  Aberdeen.  While  they were  in  the  water  a  child  of  about  ten  years  of  age  was  washed  ashore on  Ross  near  Brigade  Point  and  drowned.  The  party  was  followed  by Mr.  Homfray  who  had  them  escorted  beyond  Aberdeen  into  the jungle  and  told  to  go  away.
Later  on,  a  party  of  between  twenty  and  thirty  again   swam  from
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  469
North  Point  to  Aberdeen  with  bows  and  arrows.  They  were  met  by the  Overseer  there,  and  quietly  escorted  to  the  jungle  as  before.  They seemed  submissive  and  dejected.  Major  Ford  thought  that  during the  south-west  monsoon  they  suffered  from  hunger,  and  felt  the  want of  the  food  we  used  to  give  them,  and  hoped  that  "  our  present  atti- tude may  thus  do  good  in  the  end."
Some  Burmese  convicts,  who  had  escaped,  returned  of  their  own accord  about  this  time  and  stated  that  the  Andamanese  made  them  and other  runaways  hunt  pigs  for  them,  and  kept  them  hard  at  work  till exhausted,  laughing  at  them  the  while  :  the  convicts,  of  coarse, being  terrified.  When  they  were  emaciated  and  feeble,  they  were either  brought  back  to  the  Settlement,  or  simply  released  by  the Andamanese,  who  used  to  cut  and  wound  the  men  to  make  them work.  They  thought  nothing  of  wounding  people  on  the  slightest provocation.  Many  convicts  died  of  exhaustion  in  the  jungle,  and there  is  no  instance  of  any  other  being  treated  as  Dudhnath  was.
The  Government  of  India,  having  the  example  of  Pratt's  case before  them,  suspected  that  the  murder  of  the  Outpost  Gangsman, Gilbur  Singh,  was  not  entirely  unprovoked,  and  called  for  a  report  on the  same.  Major  Ford  was,  however,  certain  that  no  provocation  was given  to  Jacko.  The  Gangsman  would  not  allow  the  Andamanese  to enter  the  upper  story  of  the  hut  where  the  food  was  kept,  and  when they  tried  to  steal  some  coconuts  he  half  raised  his  musket,  this  being the  usual  and  most  effectual  mode  of  intimidating  them.  As  soon  as  his back  was  turned  he  was  shot.  Mr.  Corbyn  agreed  that  the  Gangsman was  quite  right  in  what  he  did,  and  thought  that  the  Andamanese  had a  hatred  of  all  Asiatics  generally,  caused  by  the  petty  (?)  provocations they  had  suffered  from  them.  I  have  learnt  from  the  Andamanese that  Major  Ford's  account  of  the  murder  of  Gilbur  Singh  was  quite correct,  and  that  no  other  provocation,  than  that  of  refusing  to  give him  food,  was  given  to  Jacko,  who  is  described  as  being  an  ill-tempered and  violent  savage.  It  should  be  remembered  that  the  Andamanese think  nothing  of  murdering  each  other  on  similar  provocation.  (The Andamanese  names  of  Jacko,  and  Moriarty,  were,  Jacko-Biala; Moriarty-Baura.)  Mr.  Horafray  also,  who  had  been  in  the  Settlement
4,70  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
since  1858,  and  who  succeeded  Mr.  Corbyn  in  the  charge  of  the Andaman  Home,  gave  one  many  facts  regarding  this  period  of  our administration  before  he  died  in  1883.
During  July,  1864,  Port  Mouat  was  examined  and  partially  sur- Teyed,  and  Major  Eord  recommended  its  occupation.  He  stated  that the  Andamanese  there  were  friendly,  and  that  Crusoe  and  Friday, formerly  prisoners  at  Moulmein,  and  now  very  well  disposed  towards us,  were  living  there.  He  also  pointed  out  that,  by  occupying  the neck  of  land  between  Port  Blair  and  Port  Mouat,  we  should  cut  off the  southern  portion  of  the  South  Andaman,  and  thus  check  the Andamanese  from  crossing.  He  recommended  that  the  work  should be  commenced  on  November  1st,  and  that  Mr.  Horn  fray  should  be put  in  charge  of  it,  and  relinquish  his  post  of  Harbour  Master.  He also  asked  for  a  lighthouse  to  be  placed  either  on  Grub  Island  or  on  the Southern  entrance  of  the  Inner  Harbour.  The  Government  of  India did  not  at  that  time  accede  to  this  proposal.  Anything  savouring  of cutting  off  portions  of  land,  or,  as  formerly  proposed  by  Dr.  Walker, with  regard  to  Port  Mouat,  driving  the  Andamanese  out  of  a  portion of  the  Great  Andaman,  too  closely  resembled  our  treatment  of  the aborigines  of  Tasmania  to  be  acceptable  to  the  Government.
Major  Eord  having  been  called  upon  for  an  expression  of  his opinion  regarding  the  line  of  conduct  adopted  by  Mr.  Corbyn  towards the  Andamanese,  replied  in  letter  No.  54A,  dated  llth  August,  1864, as  follows : —
After  saying  that  the  question  of  our  relations  with  the  Andaman- ese was  one  of  the  most  difficult  with  which  the  Superintendent  had to  deal,  he  wrote : —
"  3.  I  will  premise  my  report  by  here  referring  to  the  Revd. Mr.  Corbyn's  "Narrative  of  Events,"  dated  Rose  Island,  2nd  June, 1863,  wherein  he  remarks  OQ  the  Andamanese  Jumbo  and  Snowball who  appear  to  have  been  taken  prisoners  consequent  on  the  death  of Naval  Brigadesman  Pratt,  (who  was  killed  by  certain  Andamanese)' These  prisoners  had  for  several  months  been  detained  in  fetters  at the  Naval  Barracks  under  a  guard  of  the  Naval  Brigade.  Here  I  beg to  remark  that  the  man  now  called  '  Jumbo  '  is  not  the  man  known
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  417  ^
by  that  name  formerly  in  the  Brigade,  who  was  a  man  marked  with a  scar  on  the  right  cheek.
"  When  Pratt  was  killed  a  prow  was  here,  and  the  Malay  crew were  sent  over  with  a  promise  of  reward  to  catch  the  Andamanese supposed  to  be  concerned.  They  went,  and  in  four  days  brought  over eighteen  people,  from  whom  were  picked  two ;  the  original  Jumbo was  of  the  party,  but  one  Hamilton,  Colonel  Tytler's  orderly,  pointed out  another  man  as  Jumbo,  who  with  Snowball,  (since  drowned), were  made  prisoners,  and  the  original  Jumbo,  with  fifteen  more,  was released.  (This  'original  Jumbo'  was  afterwards  known  to  Mr. Corbyn  as  Jacko,  and  was  the  man  who  really  murdered  Pratt  for trying  to  rape  his  wife. — M.  V.  P.)
"  4.  These  prisoners,  Snowball  and  Jumbo,  are  reported  to  have been  kept  '  several  months  in  fetters  '  at  the  Naval  Brigade  barracks. These  men  were,  I  am  informed,  at  night  chained  to  the  station  signal gun  with  heavy  brass  shackles,  having  also  leg  irons  on ;  the  brass shackles  were  removed  by  day.  There  is  not  a  man  in  the  Brigade, (I  am  told  so  by  themselves),  who  believes  that  either  Jumbo  or Snowball  had  anything  to  do  with  Pratt's  death.
"  6.  On  my  arrival  here  I  found  some  forty  Andamanese  on  Ross Island  at  Mr.  Corbyn's  Andaman  Home ;  visiting  these  people  a few  days  after  I  found  one  South  Tribe  man  in  irons, — the  whole  party were,  as  I  learnt  after,  kept  under  considerable  restraint  by  a  large number  of  convict  '  para  wallahs '  about  the  Home,  and  a  day  or  two after  Colonel  Tytler  left  the  Settlement,  Mr.  Corbyn  apprised  me  of the  'escape '  during  the  night  of  several  of  the  Andamanese  prisoners amongst  whom  were  four  of  the  principal  men  of  the  South  Tribe  - a  tribe  he  was  particularly  anxious  to  keep  under  restraint,  who  he wished  to  keep  as  hostages,  and  one  of  whom  was  '  shackled.'  Mr. Corbyn  stated  the  reason  for  this  to  be  that  they  had  killed  many convicts,,  (though  on  enquiry  I  could  not  obtain  any  direct  evidence against  this  particular  tribe  in  this  respect),  only  'that  they  pil- laged the  Settlement  plantations  and  had  recently  attacked  a  party  of Officers  and  Brigadesmen  at  Port  Mouat.'  This  escape  was  effected in  spite  of  the  '  strict  watch '  of  the  Parawallahs  ordered  by  Mr.
472
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
Corbyn  over  the  Andamanese  day  and  night,  who  were '  on  no  account to  let  them  leave  the  premises  without  my  (Mr.  Corbyn's)  permis- sion..'— To  my  mind,  on  hearing  of  these  circumstances,  it  was  clear that  this  'restraint,'  opposite  to  their  mode  of  life,  was  so  irksome that  they  could  no  longer  bear  it,  even  for  the  food  and  tobacco  given them  to  induce  them  to  be  quiet.
"  6.  Mr.  Corbyn,  in  writing  to  me  on  this  subject  on  February, 29th,  says  '  of  one  fact  I  am  quite  convinced  that,  unless  we  forcibly detain  hostages  of  all  the  tribes  we  shall  give  free  license  to  a  reckless and  unreasoning  people  to  damage  and  destroy  wherever  their  impulse leads  them,  and  to  continually  provoke  bloodshed.  Those  who  have been  forcibly  detained  have  been  detained  for  sufficient  reasons,  of the  fitness  and  force  of  which  Colonel  Tytler,  considering  my  profes- sion a  pledge  of  just  treatment,  lett  me  to  be  the  judge.'
"  7.  Some  Andamanese  still  remained  at  the  Home,  but  at  10-30 on  the  1st  March  Mr.  Corbyn  wrote  to  me  '  all  the  Andamanese  have made  their  escape  except  Jumbo  and  Topsy,  the  two  latter  I  discovered on  the  point  of  following  and  arrested  them.'  Mr.  Corbyn  followed them  to  North  Point,  to  which  place  the  escaped  had  swum,  there leaving  Topsy,  '  whom  I  warnedj'  he  writes,  'that  if  the  escaped Andamanese  did  not  make  their  appearance  to-morrow  we  should inflict  summary  chastisement  on  Jumbo.'
"  On  the  2nd  March,  Mr.  Corbyn  informed  me  that  he  '  had captured  one  of  the  South  Tribe' ;  he  added,  '  I  think  it  really necessary  that  Jumbo  should  be  put  in  heavy  irons,  he  was  very violent  last  night  and  made  such  resistance  that  five  men  could  not hold  him.  If  Jumbo  escapes,  our  influence  with  the  North  Tribe is  gone  and  we  shall  hear  of  more  tragedies  like  Pratt's  murder. (Wby  ?  That  was  not  the  fault  of  the  Andamanese. — M.  V.  P.) I  propose  one  evil  to  avoid  a  greater,'  but  this  course,  I  informed  him, I  was  opposed  to,  and  could  not  consent  to.  J  umbo  gave  as  his  reason for  his  former  escape  that  '  he  had  been  beaten  by  a  Native.'
"  8.  On  the  7th  March,  Mr.  Corbyn  reported  his  return  witn J  umbo  who  he  took  with  him,  from  a  search  made  towards  Port Meadows,  having  brought  back  with  him  five  Andamanese  of  the
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  473
North  Tribe,  and  one  of  the  escaped  Andamanese  of  the  South  Tribe. While  Mr.  Corbyn  was  away,  some  Andamanese,  who  with  Topsy had  again  returned  to  Ross  Island,  again  made  their  escape.
"  9.  On  his  return  I  apprised  him  that  I  had  heard  that  the   dead body  of  a  woman  had  been  seen  on  South  Point ;    he   went  over  with some   aborigines,   but   it   could   not   be   identified.     The    body   was buried.     As  I  reported  to  Government,  it  turned  out  afterwards  that the   remains   were  those   of   Topsy.     Why   she   should  have  escaped while  her  husband  was  absent  with   Mr.    Corbyn  was    strange.     The day  before  the  last  batch  escaped,  (29th  February),  they  complained  to Mr.  Corbyn  that  some  Natives  belonging  to  a  Chudia  Brig,  repairing some  damages  in  this  port,  had  beaten  them,    '  and  this   cause,'   Mr. Corbyn  wrote,  '  seems   to  have  instigated  them  to  escape  this  time.' I  do  not  think  this  likely  however ;   the   crew   of  the  brig,  a  few of  the  very  inoffensive  people   of  Nagore,  whose  craft  had   run  into the  Lady  Cunning,  at  night,  on  her  way  over  here,  and  who,  being  all overboard,  we  saved  from  drowning,  would  be  in  my  opinion  the  very last  in  the  Settlement   to   have  done  anything   of   the  kind.     There were  many  rumours  at  this  time  of  the  severity  of  the  '  parawallahs ' over  the  Andamanese,  towards  them,  and  in  my  own  mind  the  opinion has  always  been  strong  that  these  people  by  their  harshness  or  worse drove  Topsy  and  others  with  her  to  escape,  but  that  being  weak  at  the time,  she  took  to  the  water  for  the  nearest  (south)  point,  and  had  not strength   to  reach   it   alive.     It  is  proper  here  to  say  that  it  was  not known  for  many  days  after  that  Topsy  was  drowned.     Mr.  Corbyn's own  impression  was  that  the  remains  were  those  of   a  young  woman called  Annie,  but  whom  we  have  lately  s-jen  here.     Jumbo,  as  E  have said,  was  brought  back,     Jumbo  is  a  Chief  among  his  own  people, (while  he  is  in  our  hands  it  may  always  be   considered    certain    that we  have  others  of  his  tribe,  and  their  relations,  coming  here,  wishing to  be  with  him).     By  the  23rd  April  we  had   again   17  Andamanese on   Ross  Island,   and  on  that   date  Mr.  Corbyn  wrote  to  me,  '  the Andamanese  are  again  all   trying   to  escape.'     In   deference  to  Mr. Corbyn's   experience  I  had  hitherto,  being  a  stranger  to  these  people and  their  habits,  refrained  from  interference  with  his  system   of
3  P
474
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
management  of  them,  but  from  these  continued  escapes,  and  the aversion  of  the  Andamanese  to  remain  on  Ross  Island,  it  had  now become  clear  to  me,  that  we  were  pursuing  a  wrong  system  towards them,  and  that  all  restraint  must  he  remove:!,  or  we  should  make enemies  instead  of  friends  of  them.  I  had  already  forbidden  any further  use  of  fetters,  and  I  came  to  the  determination  of  establishing Outpost  Homes  on  the  mainland  for  them.
"  10.  The  sites  for  these   Homes  I  settled,  accompanied  by  Mr. Corbyn,  on  the  9th  and  13th   April.     When,  therefore,  Mr.   Corbyn wrote  to  me  on  the  23rd  that  the  Andamanese  were  trying  to   eeoape, I  gave  him  directions  as  to  the  course  which  I  wished  pursued  ;  viz., that  they  all  be  set  at  liberty, — the  camps  shown  to  them,   and  their freedom  to  make  future  use  of  them  explained.     Mr.  Corbyn  had  now given  up  his  old   view  as  formerly  written  to  me,   that  '  he  was convinced   of   the   necessity  for   the  forcible  detention   of  hostages,' and  had  been  led  now   into  my   view  as  to  the  future  management of  these  people,  as  he  now  wrote,  { the  result  of  my  experience  (of  a year)  is,  that  we  cannot  keep  them  forcibly  in  this  island,  that  if  we succeeded  in  doing  so  we  should  only  embitter  them  against  ourselves.' On  the  same  day  he  also  wrote,  '  I  agree  with  you  it  will  be  better  to lose  no  time  in  releasing  Jumbo  and  any  others  that  wish  to  go,  for  it will   give  them   renewed  confidence,  and  when  they  see  they  are  no longer  under  restraint,    they   may   be  willing  to  return.'     In   the conclusion  of  this  letter,  Mr.   Corbyn  shows  that  a  fight  with  the 1'arawallahs  is  apprehended  if  the  Andamanese  were  not  sent  away. This  pretty  clearly  indicates  violence  on  previous  occasions,  to  which I  refer  in  paragraph  9  of  this  letter,  and  shews  what  restraints  must on  former  occasions  have  been  put  on  these  people  who  were  wishing to  go  back  to  their  homes.
"  11.  From  this  time  forward,  and  until  the  12th  June,  our  friend- ly relations  with  the  Andamanese,  and  their  confidence  in  us  in- creased  very  satisfactorily,  and  with  an  unprecedented  success.  Larger numbers  than  ever  came  before  visited  us  on  Ross  Island,  and  were more  tractable  and  good-humoured  than  they  ever  were  known  to  be hitherto.  Mr.  Corbyn  most  good-naturedly  put  up  with  the  great
WITH  THE  ANDAMANEaE.  473
inconvenience  that  these  constant  and  numerous  visitors  must  have been  to  him,  and  all  went  well  till  the  three  convicts  were  shot  by two  Andamanese  at  North  Outpost,  and  I  felt  myself  necessitated to  break  off  for  a  time  our  friendship  with  them."
Major  Ford  then  added  that,  after  a  careful  consideration  of  our past  work  with  the  Andamauese,  "  he  is  led  to  doubt  whether  the  efforts made  to  be  friendly  with  them  were  not  overdone,  and  the  indulgence and  gratification  afforded  to  their  appetites,  in  the  amount  of  food given  them,  did  not  act  prejudicially — certain  it  is  that,  with  this  daily indulgence,  a  boldness  of  manner  grew  on  them,  and  led  thdm  to  an impudence  of  demeanour  and  an  independent  swagger  that  I  had  never Eoticed  in  them  hitherto.  (They  had  left  off  cringing,  and  resumed their  real  manner — M.  V.  P.).
"  In  my  humble  opinion,  Mr.  Corbyn  was  too  lavish  of  the  (to them)  good  things  and  comforts  he  had  for  them,  they  (to  use  his own  expression)  got  '  accustomed '  to  them,  expected  at  once  to  be supplied  with  what  they  asked  for,  and  became  peevish  or  angry if  refused.  It  was  in  an  occurrence  of  this  kind  that  the  three convicts  were  killed  at  North  Outpost.
"  14.  It  will  be  seen  that,  when  forcible  detention  of  these  Anda- manese was  first  made  use  of  by  Mr.  Corbyn,  he  made  use  of  it  under sanction ;  it  was  put  a  stop  to  by  my  desire,  and  he  was  afterwards led  by  circumstances  to  agree  with  me,  and  to  see  that  no  good  could result  from  such  a  course.  Personally,  he  has  been  most  patient  and kind  to  the  Andamanese,  and  persevered  at  great  risk  of  life,  health, and  strength,  in  his  humane  efforts  to  win  their  confidence  and advance  them ;  and  in  the  above  respect  I  regret  that  he  has  resigned his  charge  of  them.  He,  however,  found  the  charge,  he  says,  ruining his  health,  and  interfering  too  much  with  his  other  duties  to  continue to  hold  singly."
After  giving  some  further  personal  explanations,  Major  Ford  stated his  own  views  with  regard  to  the  Andamanese.
"17.  We  shall  never  be  able,  I  think,  to  do  much  to  civilize  the adult  Andamanese  that  we  now  know ;  if  we  can  arrive  at  a  good  and
3  P  2
476
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
friendly  feeling  with  them,  making  them  understand  that  their  peace- ful conduct  will  win  our  regard,  whilst  hostility  will  be  met  by  with- drawal of  all  countenance  and  benefits  ;  if  we  can  from  this  get  to barter  with  them  for  bamboos,  thatch,  and  other  products  of  the forests,  and  make  them,  by  judicious  liberality  towards  them,  some- what industrious  therein  for  themselves  ;  if  from  this  we  can  get  one step  further  and  by  the  strict  exercise  of  good  faith  with  them  in  all our  dealings  make  them  know  that  we  are  to  be  trusted  ;  this  is  as much  as  we  can  expect  from  them.  This  attained,  however,  will  lead us  to  the  real  motive  of  our  efforts,  the  educating  and  civilizing  of tlieir  children."
He  advocated  the  establishment  of  a  school  under  an  Army schoolmaster  for  the  Andamanese  children  on  Ross  Island,  and  after educating  them  there,  proposed  to  send  them  to  Burmah  or  India  for a  further  education.  He  thought  that  at  first  the  children  should  not be  kept  too  long  on  Boss,  but  should  be  allowed  to  go  and  visit  their homes  at  intervals.  He  suggested  that  the  master  should  study  their language  and  form  a  vocabulary  of  it,  thus  paving  the  way  for  the advent  of  a  missionary  and  eventual  Christianity.  He  added  :-—
"  22.  It  is  true  they  have  no  conception  even  of  a  Supreme  Being and  are  perhaps  the  lowest  in  the  family  of  mankind,  but  these  very reasons  I  would  urge  for  no  longer  neglecting  them." (In  this  statement  he  was  wrong. —  M.  V,  P).
In  Mr.  Corbyn's  defence  it  must  be  remembered  that  he  had Colonel  Tytler's  letter,  quoted  in  Chapter  X,  in  which  he  was  author- ized to  detain  the  Andamanese  on  Ross  Island,  as  hostages.
There  appear  to  have  been  two  Andamanese  women,  both  called "Hira"  in  Andamanese,  and  both  called  "Topsy  "  in  English.  Of these,  one  was  the  wife  of  Jumbo  who  did  such  good  work  for  us,  and who  was  drowned ;  and  the  other  was  an  unmarried  girl,  who  died  of measles  on  Viper  during  the  epidemic  of  1876.  Jumbo  was  installed by  me  as  Chief  of  Baja  Jag  in  1879,  and  died,  a  very  old  man,  in 1882.
In   reply   to   the  above  letter  from  Major  Ford,  the  Government
WITH  THE  ANDAMAXESE.  477
of  India  wrote  that,  with  regard  to  Mr.  Corbyn's  resignation  of  tho charge  of  the  Andaman  Homes,  these  matters  rested  entirely  with  the Superintendent,  who  could  make  what  arrangements  he  thought  fit. The  Governor  General  in  Council  was  well  aware  of  the  great  zeal  and earnestness  with  which  Mr.  Corbyn  had  hitherto  devoted  himself  to the  object  of  establishing  friendly  intercourse  with  the  Andamanese, by  the  exhibition  of  kindness  and  good  treatment  towards  those  whom he  has  persuaded  to  remain  at  the  Settlement,  and  the  Government regretted  to  infer  that  some  cause  had  arisen,  besides  that  mentioned by  Mr.  Corbyn,  to  induce  him  to  cease  from  his  efforts.
"  That  this  is  the  case  must  be  inferred  from  the  circumstance that  Mr.  Corbyn's  withdrawal  seems  to  have  taken  place  at  a  time when,  owing  to  the  interruption  of  communication  with  the  Anda- manese, and  to  there  being  but  two  children  at  the  Home,  the  charge of  the  establishment  could  neither  have  involved  much  responsibility nor  occupied  much  time."
An  explanation  was  however  required  about  certain  cattle  and stores  belonging  to  the  Homes.  That  establishment  had  hitherto been  supposed  to  be  merely  a  building  in  which  a  few  Andamanese were  accommodated,  fed,  and  clothed,  at  the  public  cost ;  but  some more  elaborate  affair  would  seem  to  have  been  since  established. They  ordered  that  the  accounts  of  the  Homes  should  be  submitted monthly.
In  reply  to  this,  Major  Ford  reported  on  the  state  of  the  Andaman Homes  under  Mr.  Corbyn.  He  wrote  that  there  were  a  considerable quantity  of  cattle,  pigs,  and  stores,  in  an  extensive  range  of  tem- porary stabling  and  styes,  on  the  Ridge  at  Ross  Island ;  Rupees  420 had  been  invested  in  pigs,  and  a  similar  sum  in  cows,  the  milk  of which  was  sold  and  yielded  a  profit  to  the  Homes.  He  did  not  like this  traffic,  but  Mr.  Corbyn  said  milk  was  a  good  anti-scorbutic  and that  people  bought  it  readily.
Mr.  Corbyn,  indeed,  intended  to  increase  the  stock  of  cows  as they  brought  in  a  steady  income,  and  this  was  required,  as  the  ex- penditure on  the  Homes  had  been  much  in  excess  of  the  Government
478  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
Grant,  Latterly,  the  amount  realised  by  the  sale  of  milk  had  fluc- tuated, as  the  convicts  in  charge  mismanaged  affairs,  and  the  Naval Brigade  men  who  used  to  huy  most  of  the  milk  had  gone.  Forty-four convicts  were  employed  at  the  Home,  and  when  Mr.  Corbyn  was asked  to  reduce  the  number  of  men,  he  objected  to  do  so.  A  few  men were,  however,  taken  away  by  the  Superintendent's  order,  as  they were  urgently  wanted  for  other  works.  The  Civil  Surgeon  objected to  the  Homes  on  sanitary  grounds,  and  in  fact  the  whole  thing  had become  a  nuisance  on  Ross.
Major  Ford  had  written  to  Mr.  Corbyn,  requesting  him  either  to move  the  Homes  or  to  do  away  with  all  the  buildings  he  could  spare, and  Mr.  Corbyn  was  apparently  offended  at  this  (though  Colonel Tytler  had  always  disapproved  of  the  site  for  the  Homes  ),  and resigned  the  charge  of  the  Andamanese  on  the  day  he  received  the letter.  The  old  "  Andaman  Home,"  as  at  first  started,  had  been abandoned,  and  the  huts  were  in  ruins  ;  the  Andamanese  were  living in  the  cattle  sheds  and  styes.  Whenever  Major  Ford  tried  to  make an  alteration  in  matters  concerning  the  Homes,  Mr.  Corbyn  met  his proposal  with  his  resignation.  In  order  to  retain  his  services,  which were  valuable,  on  account  of  the  good  work  he  had  done,  his  personal friendship  with  the  Andamanese,  and  his  knowledge  of  their  ways and  language,  Major  Ford  stated  that  he  was  obliged  to  "  give  in  to him  in  a  humiliating  manner."  While  the  relations  between  the  two were  so  strained  the  Government  called  for  the  Andaman  Home accounts,  and  Major  Ford  thought  it  best  to  wait  for  their  decision in  that  matter  before  referring  to  anything  else.  The  dairy  had failed,  and  he  wished  to  reduce  the  stock  of  cows,  but  Mr.  Corbyn would  not  permit  this,  and  used  large  bodies  of  convicts  in  making extensive  clearings  at  the  two  Outpost  Homes,  against  Dr.  Gamack's wish.  Mr.  Corbyn's  last  resignation  having  been  accepted  he  was relieved  by  Mr.  Homfray,  and  was  told  to  make  over  the  stock  to  him. He  replied  that  he  would  only  make  over  such  as  was  the  property of  Government,  and  appeared  to  wish  that  the  cattle,  on  which  he Baid  he  had  spent  a  large  sum  of  his  private  money,  should  be  sold,
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  479
and  he  should  be  reimbursed  from  the  proceeds.  Major  Ford  agreed to  this,  but  on  Mr.  Homfray  going  into  the  matter,  it  \vas  found  that much  of  the  Government  property  had  been  lost,  some  was  at  the Outposts,  and  the  rest  had  been  stolen  by  the  Andamanese.  The number  of  convicts  in  the  Homes  was  reduced  to  twenty.
Mr.  Corbyn  then  submitted  a  detailed  statement  of  the  receipt  and expenditure  at  the  Homes,  from  which  it  appeared  that  a  balance  of Bl.349-5-4  was  due  to  him  on  account  of  money  expended  on behalf  of  the  Andamanese.
He  claimed  on  account  of  expenses  incurred  in  taking  eight Andamanese  to  Calcutta,  R684-5-3 ;  and  on  account  of  expenses incurred  in  taking  six  Andamanese  to  Burmah,  R812-14-3.  He had  spent  R440  on  pigs,  and  had  bought  a  Malay  prah,  which,  as Major  Ford  justly  remarked,  "  however  useful  it  might  be  to  the Chaplain  when  visiting  the  outposts,  was  a  danger  to  the  Settlement because  the  convicts  could  seize  and  escape  in  it.  "  The  Government of  India  sanctioned  the  amount  above-mentioned  being  paid  to  Mr. Corbyn.
As  an  instance  of  the  weight  which  our  relations  with  the  Anda- raunese  carried  at  this  time  in  the  affairs  of  the  Settlement,  Major Ford,  when  writing  to  the  Government  of  India  on  the  17th  June 1864t,  states  that  he  had  heard  a  rumour  (which  was  unfounded) that  Port  Blair  was  to  be  made  a  penal  settlement  for  all  the European  convicts  of  Great  Britain.  He  deprecated  this  on,  amongst other  grounds,  "  that  they  would  be  a  constant  source  of  alarm  to the  Andamanese,  and  a  thwarting  of  all  our  efforts."
With  the  resignation  of  Mr.  Corbyn  of  the  charge  of  the  Anda- manese closes  a  period  of  our  relations  with  them,  and  I  will  briefly comment  upon  it  with  the  light  which  our  subsequent  dealings  with them,  and  their  and  Mr.  Homf ray's  accounts  of  Mr.  Corbyn's doings,  afford.  Colonel  Tytler  appears  to  have  been  prejudiced against  the  Andamanese  from  the  first,  and  to  have  considered  a repressive  policy  towards  them  necessary  in  the  interests  of  the
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
Settlement.  Mr.  Corbyn  in  detaining  and  fettering  them  seems, at  the  first  anyhow,  to  have  been  acting  with  the  sanction  of  the Superintendent.
During  the  time  he  was  establishing  friendly  relations  with  them, Mr.  Corbyn's  conduct  was  certainly  most  judicious,  and  he  was  very kind  to  the  Andamauese,  and  really  fond  of  them.  The  establish- ment and  farm  at  the  Andaman  Homes,  to  which  Major  Ford  objected. was  in  its  wrong  place  on  Ross  Island,  but  within  a  few  years  after- wards Mr.  Homfray  had  opened  similar  farms  and  gardens  at  the Andaman  Homes,  though  in  distant  jungle  stations,  and  such  continue to  exist  to  the  present  day  ;  Mr.  Corbyn  was  only  in  advance  of  his time.
With  regard  to  the  effect  his  repressive  measures  had  on  the  Anda- manese,  they  were  certainly  excessive,  and  terrified  the  savages,  but his  ideas  on  the  subject  were  correct,  and  these  same  measures,  how- ever objectionable  and  illegal  they  may  have  been,  overawed  them, and  gave  them  a  sense  of  our  power,  making  Mr.  Hornf  ray's  subse- quent successful  dealings  with  them  easier.  The  Andamanese,  on  the whole,  seem  to  have  liked  M!r.  Corbyn,  and  did  not  resent  his  treat- ment of  them  as  much  as  might  have  been  expected.  No  doubt  this, as  well  as  the  murders  at  the  North  Outpost,  broke  off  for  a  time  our friendly  relations  with  them,  but  not  to  so  great  an  extent  as  Major Ford  thought,  and  the  Outpost  murder  was  the  isolated  act  of  two men,  neither  of  whom  were  considered  to  be  "  good  characters  "  even by  their  fellow  tribesmen,  and  was  not  an  act  of  conspiracy  on  the part  of  the  whole  tribe.  It  occurred  exactly  as  stated  by  Major  Ford, who  appears  to  have  been  the  first  Superintendent  who  had  any  real appreciation  of  our  dealings  with  the  Andamanese  from  their  point  of view.  Similar  murders  have  occurred  since,  but  have  merely  resulted in  the  individuals  concerned  being  punished,  the  remainder  of  the Andamanese  helping  to  arrest  them.  It  was,  however,  very  necessary in  "  those  early  difficult  days,"  as  Mr.  Homfray  used  to  describe  them, to  take  severe  notice  of  any  act  of  hostility  or  treachery  on  the  part of  the  savages:,  hoAvever  much  they  might  have  been  provoked.  The
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  431
Andamanese  on  Ross  Island  disliked  tbeir  English  education,  and  on this  account  they  escaped.
The  principal  mistake  in  our  dealings  with  the  Andamanese  at this  period  was,  that  both  the  Superintendent  and  Mr.  Corbyn  appear to  have  been  so  taken  up  in  guarding  against  the  ill-doings  of  the Andamanese,  that  it  never  occurred  to  them  to  take  any  precautions against  the  misconduct  of  the  Naval  Brigadesmen,  and  the  convicts who  were  associated  with  the  savages  in  the  Home  ;  though  a  perusal of  the  history  of  our  relations  with  the  Australian  and  Tasmanian Aborigines,  and  the  narratives  of  travellers  in  the  islands  of  the Pacific  Ocean,  would  have  shown  them  what  invariably  followed  the mixing  of  convicts  or  merchant  sailors  (of  whom  the  Naval  Brigade was  chiefly  composed)  with  savages.
The  Andamanese,  even  now,  speak  bitterly  of  the  treatment  they received  from  these  men,  and  Major  Ford  seems  to  have  suspected  the existence  of  the  misdoings  of  the  Europeans  and  convicts ;  but  it  is astonishing  that  none  of  his  predecessors  should  have  done  so,  and that  no  one  should  have  considered  that  the  Andamanese  required  to be  protected  against  us,  quite  as  much  as  we  required  to  be  protected against  them.
482  A  "ISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
CHAPTER  XIII.
Mr.  Homfray  takes  charge  of  the  Andamanese — They  behave  better — Friendly  rela- tions with  them  resumed — Many  Andamanese  in  the  Home  —Mr.  Homfray  makes them  work — His  treatment  of  them — Relations  extended  to  more  distant  Septs  — Annual  Report  for  1864-1865 — Report  by  the  Government  of  Burmah  on  the Andamanese — Maia  Biala's  acquaintance  made— Jacko's  death  and  burial — Mr,  Homfray's  notes  on  the  customs  of  the  Andamanese— Mr.  Horn  fray  takes Andamanese  to  Calcutta— Mr.  Homfray's  further  notes  on  the  Andamanese — Men  from  the  Akar-j5d/e  tribe  first  come  in  to  the  Home — Jim  murders  Jumbo and  hides  but  is  caught — The  Andamanese  work  for  convicts — 'Annual  Report  for 1865-66.
MR.  HOMFRAY,  on  assuming  charge  of  the  Andamanese,  collected some  boys  on  Boss  Island,  built  a  hut  for  them  to  live  in,  and  endeav- oured to  win  their  confidence  and  affection,  and  to  teach  them.  It  is to  be  regretted  that  he  was  obliged  to  employ  convicts  to  act  as  guards over  the  boys,  but  so  long  as  the  Home  was  on  Ross  Island  in  the vicinity  of  the  European  and  Native  residents,  this  seems  to  have  been unavoidable.  He  was  a  man  of  a  singularly  kind-hearted  and  patient disposition,  was  from  the  first  really  attached  to  the  Andamanese personally,  and  they  were  quick  to  see  this  and  reciprocate  the  attach- ment. He  taught  the  boys  to  be  orderly,  decent,  and  obedient;  to refrain  from  stealing  all  they  saw  and  desired;  and  to  saw,  dig,  plant a  garden  of  native  vegetables  for  themselves,  to  fetch  and  carry  for him,  to  wash,  and  to  cook  their  own  food.  He  rightly  considered  that such  an  education  was  the  first  to  be  given  to  such  savages  who  he saw  picked  up  a  colloquial  knowledge  of  Hindustani  of  their  own accord,  and  he  left  such  subjects  as  English  reading  and  writing,  and the  ordinary  primary  education  of  an  European  child,  to  a  later period.
During  the  month  of  October  1864  the  Andamanese  came  into  the vicinity  of  the  Settlement  and  stole  a  few  trifles,  but  were  otherwise quiet  and  well  behaved.  They  were  well  treated,  and  the  Chief Commissioner  of  British  Burmah,  in  approving  of  the  orders  issued  by
WITH  THK  ANDAMANESK.
Major  Ford  after  the  murder  of  Gilbur  Singh  at  the  North  Outpost  by the  Andamanese, regarding  our  policy  towards  the  aborigines,  added  that they  should  be  induced  to  bring  in  bamboos,  thatching  leaves,  and other  articles  of  jungle  produce,  and  that  no  food  should  ever  be given  to  them  except  in  exchange  for  such  articles.  Neither  Jacko nor  Moriarty,  the  two  murderers  of  Gilbur  Singh,  had  up  to  this  time appeared.
The  funds  of  the  Andaman  Home  ware  supervised  by  the Superintendent,  who  audited  them  quarterly,  and  were  expended  on rations  and  presents  for  the  Andamanese,  much  as  in  the  present  day.
At  this  time  there  appears  to  have  been  a  fund  in  Calcutta established  by  Mr.  Corbyn  in  support  of  the  Andaman  Home  and called  the  Calcutta,  Andamanese  Donation  Fund,  but  we  hear  nothing more  of  it,  and  no  sums  were  brought  on  the  books  of  the  Home from  such  a  fund,  so  it  may  be  presumed  that  with  Mr.  Corbyn's resignation  of  the  charge  of  the  Andamanese  it  was  abolished.
In  October,  1864,  Mr.  Homfray,  in  reporting  on  the  subject  of the  Andamanese  to  Major  Ford  stated  .that  the  boys  whom  he  had on  Ross  Island  were  obedient,  affectionate,  and  well  behaved.  He noted  that  they  were  fond1  of  tobacco,  and  that  their  craving  for  it was  the  strongest  hold  he  had  on  them.  He  then  went  on  to  recom- mend that  Jacko  and  Moriarty  should  be  allowed  to  visit  us  at  the Andaman  Home  again.  He  had  met  them  on  the  mainland  and  found that  they  were  most  anxious  to  be  friendly  and  had  behaved  very well,  they  actually  cried  when  he  would  not  permit-  them  to return  to  Ross  with  him.  He  further  feared  that  if  these  men  were ostracised  he  would  not  be  safe  when  visiting  the  Outpost  Homes. They  were  Chiefs  and  their  good  will  was  of  importance  to  the Settlement ;  so  Major  Ford,  much  against  his  inclinations,  directed that  they  should  be  admitted  to  friendly  relations  with  us,  being, however,  treated  with  coldness  at  first  in  order  to  impress  upon  them the  fact  that  we  had  neither  forgiven  nor  forgotten  their  conduct.
Accordingly  on  the  1st  November  Mr.  Homfray  went  to  the South  Outpost  Home  where  about  fifty  Andamanese  of  both  <exes  had collected.  They  had  bows  and  arrows  but  wben  they  recognised  Mr.
3  <j  2
484
A  HISTORY  OP  OTJR  RELATIONS
Homfray  they  hid  them  and  seemed  glad  to  meet  him.  Some  twenty swam  out  to  the  hoat  while  others  on  shore  began  to  sing  and  call Myo-Tee-ree  (Mala  Tiri,  a  name  the  Andamanese  had  given  to  Mr. Honfray).  Moriarty,  who  was  the  Chief  and  the  man  who  had  murdered Gilbur  Singh  in  June,  1864,  boldly  told  his  name  and  asked  Mr. Homfray  to  come  on  shore,  saying  that  he  would  give  him  some  bows and  arrows.  Mr.  Homfray  accordingly  went  and  was  given  three bows.  He  also  saw  Sandys  Sahib,  an  Andamanese,  who  had  been wounded  that  day  by  some  slugs  fired  at  him  at  Aberdeen  in  return for  some  arrows  he  with  others  had  fired  at  armed  men  who  were trying  to  prevent  their  plundering.  He  had  eleven  shots  in  nis stomach  but  owing  to  the  small  charge  of  powder  had  escaped  being killed.  He  was  plastered  over  with  red  earth  and  oil  and  expected to  die.  Twelve  Andamanese  accompanied  Mr.  Homfray  back  to Ross,  among  them  being  Friday,  who  had  been  a  prisoner  at  Moulmein in  Major  Haughton's  time,  and  who  took  the  lead  of  the  party  and remained  two  days  on  Ross.  On  returning  these  people  to  their  camp Mr.  Homfray  found  that  the  other  Andamanese  were  anxious  to  know how  their  friends  had  been  treated,  and  had  been  on  the  point  of swimming  across  to  ascertain.  From  this  time  they  gave  Mr.  Hornfrav the  name  of  "  Maia-jo-la,"  a  term  of  great  respect.  He  gave  them food  and  they  gave  him  four  bows  and  some  arrows  and  about  twenty of  them  returned  to  Ross  with  him.  Moriarty  was  anxious  to  come but  Mr.  Homfray  told  him  that  the  Superintendent  was  angry  with him  on  account  of  his  doings,  which  remark  Moriarty  did  not  like. Sandys  Sahib  finding  himself  better  came  over.  After  a  lapse  of  ten days  Mr.  Homfray  took  some  of  these  Andamanese  to  the  North Outpost  Home  to  look  for  the  North  Tribe.  On  arrival  there  he could  not  understand  why  Jumbo  would  not  make  friends  with  some of  the  others  who  were  there,  and  after  a  little  persuasion  the Andamanese  told  him  that  the  North  Tribe  had  quarrelled  with  the South  Tribe  and  that  they  at  any  time  might  have  a  fight.  A  woman was  the  first  to  explain  this.
After  waiting  an  hour  he  got  Jumbo  and  a  couple  of  his  party  to come  to  Ross,  but  unwillingly,  and  Jumbo  did  not  seem  to  care  for
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  435
presents  pressed  on  him.  On  arrival  at  Eoss  Mr.  Homfray  gave  them a  pig  for  a  feast,  in  connection  with  which  a  circumstance  occurred which  unfortunately  frightened  Jumbo  still  more,  as  the  knife  to  be used  for  killing  the  pig  was  also  used  for  threatening  him,  and  he  beg- ged  Mr.  Homfray  to  take  him  away.  The  women  also  begged  him  to separate  the  two  Tribes,  which,  after  taking  away  the  knife,  lie  did. He  then  brought  the  grown-up  men  of  the  South  Tribe,  one  by  one into  his  room,  where  he  had  secreted  Jumbo,  and  made  them  embrace and  make  friends,  which  they  at  last  did,  crying  for  a  quarter  of  an hour.  After  some  days  Jumbo  was  taken  to  the  South  Outpost  by Friday,  and  the  quarrel  was  patched  up.
At  this  time  about  fifty  Andamanese,  including  women  and  child- ren, used  to  swim  over  to  Ross  with  only  a  bamboo  for  a  support. Moriarty  and  Jacko  were  among  the  number  who  did  this,  although they  had  been  forbidden  to  come,  so  they  had  to  be  sent  back  which they  did  not  like  at  all,  and  Mr.  Hoinfray  remarked  that,  from  the way  they  looked  at  him,  he  was  frightened  to  go  over  to  their  camp, and  hoped  that,  if  he  was  expected  to  go  over  there,  these  Chiefs  might be  pardoned.  Should  they  commit  a  second  offence,  he  suggested  that as  a  punishment,  they  be  kept  prisoners  in  Ross  Island,  as  they  would feel  that  to  be  a  greater  punishment  than  merely  being  prevented  from coming  there,  and  it  would  be  a  greater  security  to  himself.  He  thought that  to  forbid  them  to  come  to-  Ross  was  scarcely  any  punishment,  as it  did  not  in  any  way  interfere  with  their  jungle  life,  and  the  freedom to  which  they  had  been  accustomed,  and  only  provoked  them.  He said  that  the  Andamanese  plundered  as  much  as  ever,  and  he  was  ob- liged to  search  them  before  they  left  Ross,  after  paying  a  visit  there, as  they  stole  almost  everything  they  saw,  particularly  iron,  and  used  to conceal  small  articles  inside  bamboos,  and  in  their  parcels  of  food.  He had  begun  to  learn  a  little  of  their  language,  and  was  teaching  them Hindustani,  in  which  he  always  conversed  with  them.
During  November  some  Andamanese  came  to  Viper  Island,  and though  armed  with  bows,  arrows,  and  knives,  they  behaved  quietly  and well,  going  away  again  after  getting  some  food.  A  few  days  after  this some  othertt  came  to  Haddo,  and  were  given  some  food  and  asked  to
A  HISTORY  OF  OCR  RELATIONS
supply  bamboos  in  return.  They  picked  up  fifteen  old  ones  in  the jungle  and  brought  them  in,  but  when  they  were  told  that  we  wanted freshly  cut  ones  they  went  away.  Some  others  also  came  into  Aber- deen and  Phoenix  Bay  from  the  south,  plundering  the  gardens  and huts  of  fruit,  convicts'  clothing,  and  utensils.
Mr.  Homfray  states  that  during  this  month  a  very  bright  and  cheer- ful lad  of  the  North  Tribe,  named  Bob,  and  aged  about  14,  died.  He was  the  most  useful  and  best  behaved  boy  in  the  Home.
During  the  month  of  December,  1864,  about  one  hundred  Anda- manese  lived  in  the  Home  on  Ross  Island,  and  gave  no  trouble.  No restraint  was  put  upon  them,  and  they  were  taken  back  to  the  jungle whenever  they  wanted  to  go,  though  they  were  not  allowed  to  swim away  on  account  of  their  thefts.  This  policy  resulted  in  better  behavi- our and  less  suspicion  on  their  part,  and  one  day  when  they  all  wanted to  go  and  found  that  no  objection  to  their  doing  so  was  made,  forty came  back  again  shortly  afterwards  on  a  bamboo  raft.  During  this month  the  Lieutenant-Governor  of  Bengal,  and  the  Commander-in- Chief  of  Madras  both  paid  visits  to  Port  Blair  and  were  surprised  to find  a  number  of  Andamanese  children  in  clean  clothes  and  with  pretty manners  turned  out  to  meet  them.  Mr.  Homfray  wrote  that  he  thought a  Tribe  (meaning  of  course  a  Sept)  consisted  of  about  forty  to  fifty people,  and  that  the  Andamanese  had  unlimited  quantities  of  food  in the  jungle,  and  never  died  from  starvation,  as  this  food  was  easily  pro- cured. He  added  :  —
"  They  dig  up  four  kinds  of  wild  roots  which  I  take  to  be  wild yams,  (correct  —  M.  V.  P.,),  sweet  potatoes,  china  potatoes,  and  kitchen potatoes.  (None  of  these  three  are  indigenous  in  the  Andamans,  —  - M.  V.  P.)  There  is  also  breadfruit,  (Mr.  Homfray  may  have  meant Pandanus  —  M.  V.  P.,)  durian,  mangosteen  (neither  of  which  are  in the  Andamans,  —  M.  V.P.,}  plantain,  jack,  and  various  other  fruits; also  several  kinds  of  nuts."
He  had  a  great  wish  to  make  the  Andamanese  do  useful  work,  and employ  them  in  cutting  bamboos,  and  in  rowing  him  about  the  har- bour. He  discovered  that  they  were  unable  to  count.
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  487
This  cutting  of  bamboos  was  merely  done  by  the  Andamanese  in obedience  to  Mr.  Homfray's  order,  and  they  did  not  bring  them  in  of theii-  own  accord  to  barter  with.
During  January,  1865,  Major  Ford  strongly  urged  on  the  Govern- ment the  importance  of  opening  out  a  small  Settlement  at  Port  Mouat and  connecting  it  with  Port  Blair  by  road,  as  it  would,  he  thought, separate  the  North  and  South  Tribes,  enable  us  the  easier  to  identify which  Tribe  gave  trouble  in  any  particular  instance,  and  would  con- vince the  Andamanese  of  our  power,  and  that  we  had  come  to  the Andamans  to  stay.  He  mentions  that  the  people  inland,  on  the  south side,  were  the  most  troublesome,  not  knowing  them  to  be  the  Jarawas who  had  no  communication  with  the  Aka-2?ea-da  Septs.
During  this  month  Jacko  and  Moriarty  were  forgiven,  as  Mr.  Horn- fray  urged  on  their  behalf  that  they  were  provoked  to  do  what  they did,  and  that  it  must  be  considered  that  these  people  have  never  known any  law  or  restraint :  are  very  irritable  and  quick-tempered,  know nothing  of  right  or  wrong,  and  fear  nothing  except  a  musket.  On  the occasion  of  the  murder  in  question  there  were  a  lot  of  them  armed  with bows  and  arrows  asking  for  food,  of  which  enough  was  not  given  to them,  and  Mr.  Homfray  further  excused  their  actions  by  saying  that they  are  accustomed  to  see  convicts  punished,  or,  as  it  would  appear to  them,  ill-treated  by  us,  when  they  do  not  do  as  we  wish.  They  had waited  till  Tolidar  Girba  Singh,  (as  Mr.  Homfray  writes  the  name  of the  murdered  convict,)  was  off  his  guard,  and  then  Jacko,  Chief  of  the North  Tribe,  and  Moriarty,  Chief  of  the  South  Tribe,  shot  him  with their  arrows  from  a  few  yards  distant,  and  mortally  wounded  him.  It was  part  of  Girba  Singh's  duty  to  punish  the  Andamanese  when  that was  necessary,  which  may  have  been  an  additional  reason  for  the  mur- der, as  these  people  hate  those  who  punish  them ;  and  on  this  account Mr.  Homfray  always  got  some  one  else  to  do  that  part  of  his  duty. When  the  Andamanese  used  to  complain  to  him  that  they  had  been punished,  he  would  reply  that  it  had  been  done  by  the  Superintend- ent's order  and  so  keep  on  friendly  terms  with  them,  which  subterfuge was,  he  urged,  necessary  as  a  diplomatic  convenience.  Mr.  Homfray added  that  Jacko,  since  his  pardon,  had  been  living  entirely  with  him
483
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
and  that  his  tribe  were  better  behaved.  At  this  time  Mr.  Homfray visited  the  Arohi-pelago  Islands  for  the  first  time,  but  did  not  meet with  any  of  the  Andamanese  there,  though  he  landed  on  Sir  Hugh, Neill,  and  Havelock  Islands.  He  was  told  by  the  Aka-2?<?'es-da  with him  that  the  Balawa-da,  as  he  found  the  inhabitants  of  the  Archi- pelago Islands  were  called,  were  friendly  with  the  Sept  living  to  the north  of  Port  Blair,  and  constantly  mixed  with  them.  He  was  also informed  that  they  were  all  Ar-yduto,  or,  as  he  put  it,  "  live  on  fish." He  noticed  the  large  quantity  of  drift  teak  logs  on  the  shores  of  these Islands,  and  found  that  his  Andamanese  could  give  him  names  for  all the  hills,  encampments,  and  islands  he  saw.  On  the  return  journey two  Andamanese  steered  the  steam  launch,  and  did  it  very  well,  (an accomplishment  that  they  have  become  very  ex  pert  at  now— M.  V.  P.) With  regard  to  their  language  he  noted  that  he  has  a  daily  average  of thirty  Andsmanese  in  the  Home  who  are  beginning  to  learn  Hindus- tani, and  one  convict  Munshi,  and  three  of  the  Parawallahs  attached to  the  Home,  can  speak  a  little  Andamanese,  he  himself  also  having learnt  about  300  words  of  that  language.
A  man  of  the  Puchikwdr  tribe  from  the  Middle  Straits  came  to  the Home  during  the  month  of  January,  1865,  and  thus  commenced  our friendly  relations  with  that  tribe,  which  have  never  been  interrupted since.  In  February,  1865,  Mr.  Homfray  was  sent  by  Major  Ford  in the  Diana  to  Port  Mouat,  to  catch  some  Burmese  runaway  convicts who  had  made  a  canoe  there,  and  he  took  forty  Andamanese  with  him. They  told  him  that  there  was  a  hostile  tribe  on  Rutland  Island  with whom  the  Aka-2?e'<i-da  did  not  mix,  this  being  the  first  mention  of  this tribe  of  Jarawas.  The  Andamanese  with  him  knew  Port  Mouat  and took  Mr.  Homfray  to  the  camp  there,  where  there  were  about  twenty others  in  possession  of  property  taken  at  different  times  from  runaways. Some  of  the  Naval  Brigade  men  were  with  him,  and,  as  usual,  gave trouble  by  plundering  the  encampment.  Mr.  Homfray  very  rightly objected  to  this,  and  addressed  Major  Ford  with  a  request  that  allarti- cles  required  from  the  Andamanese  should  be  purchased  through  him, (Homfray),  the  proceeds  to  go  to  the  Home  Funds.
The  Andamanese  in  the  Home  were  at  this  time  beginning  to  make
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
themselves  useful,  having  helped  to  get  the  ballast  from  a  sunken lighter  and  so  raise  her,  they  diving  for  this  purpose  to  a  depth  of  six fathoms.  They  also  brought  in  bamboos  and  rowed  boats.  Mr. Homfray  used  to  reward  them  for  their  work  by  the  present  of  a  pig. (Except  as  a  training,  it  cannot  be  considered  that  working  the Andarnanese  with  convicts,  and  in  the  same  manner,  was  very  judici- ous. During  Mr.  Horn  fray's  charge  of  them  they  were  so  closely associated  with  the  convicts  that  many  evil  results  ensued  which  were not  discovered  till  after  the  mischief  had  been  done  past  remedying.— M.  V.  P.)
A  party  of  convicts  had  been  cutting  bamboos  in  the  jungle  during this  month,  and  after  some  days,  when  they  were  going  away  on  the completion  of  their  work,  the  Andamanese  who  had  collected  near and  were  watching,  sent  away  their  women  and  children,  and  then took  away  from  the  convicts  all  the  articles  they  required.  Some  of the  same  Andamanese  then  came  to  Ross,  and  were  identified  and  con- fined by  Mr.  Homfray.
Others  were  sent  away  and  told  to  bring  back  what  they  had  stolen, and  were  threatened  with  punishment  if  they  did  not  do  so.  After two  days  they  returned  with  some  of  the  things  and  said  that  the  re- mainder had  been  taken  far  away  by  Aodamanese  who  could  not  be found.
On  the  other  hand,  another  party  gave  Mr.  Homfray  warning  re- garding some  Burmese  convicts  who  had  escaped  with  fire  arms,  and •were  making  canoes  in  which  to  leave  the  islands.
More  Andamanese  from  the  Middle  Straits,  and  some  from  the Archipelago  Islands  came  into  the  Home  during  the  month,  and  at their  meeting  with  the  members  of  the  North  and  South  Tribes  Mr. Homfray  describes  the  crying  as  having  "lasted  for  three  days." Such  a  meeting,  called  "  Jeg  "  by  the  Andamanese,  necessitated  a prolonged  dance  which  Mr.  Homfray  watched,  and  noticed  that  the guests  commenced,  the  women  taking  precedence  of  the  men ;  when they  were  tired  the  hosts  danced  in  similar  order ;  at  the  end  of  the dance  both  parties  and  both  sexes  joined  indiscriminately.
3    E
490
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
In  March,  1865,  Mr.  Homfray  reported  that  the  Andamanese  were beiiig  kindly  treated  by  all,  and  were  losing  their  surprise  at  the  novel  - ties  they  saw.  They  had  learnt  the  value  of  money  and  used  to  dive in  the  sea  for  coins,  witli  which  they  afterwards  bought  articles,  prin- cipally food,  in  ths  bazaar.  He  considered  that  their  craving  for tobacco  was  the  lever  by  which  they  could  be  most  easily  influenced, and  remarks  that  they  have  discovered  the  value  of  dogs  in  assisting them  while  pig-hunting,  and  are  taking  care  of  them.
He  advocated  an  idea  which  was  both  remarkable  and  utterly subversive  of  discipline ;  namely,  that  the  Andamanese  should  not  kill the  runaway  convicts,  but  should  induce  them  to  settle  down  with  them in  the  distant  jungles,  intermarry  with  them,  clear  land  and  cultivate it,  and  rear  a  race  of  half-breeds.  The  Government  of  India,  on  hear- ing of  this  proposal,  negatived  it  most  emphatically,  but  it  is  a  curious fact  that  the  Andamanese  women  breed  better  from  Natives  of  India than  from  the  males  of  their  own  race.
Major  Ford's  Report  to  the  Government  of  India  on  the  progress of  the  Penal  Settlement  of  Port  Blair,  during  the  year  1864-65,  was the  first  Annual  Report  of  any  importance  submitted,  and  in  it  he summarises  all  that  had  gone  before.  His  chapter  on  the  Aborigines  is accordingly  given  in  full.
"  Since  the  present  Settlement  on  Port  Blair,  the  Andamanese  at
the  first  evinced  apparently  more  decided  objection  to  our  occupation
of  their  shores  than  they  did  in  the  old  days  of  Lieutenant  Blair's
colony.     His  Settlement  was  certainly  more  free  from  their  attacks,
,  but  much  of  this  immunity  may  be  attributed  to  his  safe  position.
"  Such  hostility  as  has  been  evinced  since  our  present  occupancy has  been  principally  towards  those  who  first  commenced  clearing  and dwelling  on  the  mainland  at  "  Aberdeen  "  and  "  Haddo,"  from  which places  they  long  tried  to  oust  those  convicts  ;  constantly  annoying  them with  flights  of  arrows,  so  much  so  that  on  two  or  three  occasions  it  was necessary  to  turn  the  guns  of  the  Guard  Vessel  upon  the  surrounding jungle,  in  the  shelter  of  which  they  would  sometimes  assemble  in  some hundreds,  and  thus  frighten  them  off.  But  from  this  time  these  annoy- ances from  the  aborigines  became  less;  when  they  were  met  with,
WITH  THE  ANDAMANE8E.  491
they  were  kindly  treated,  and  by  degrees  became  better  disposed  to meet  such  advances.  At  length,  friendly  meetings  would  take  place at  "  North  Point,"  and  presents  were  given  and  exchanged.  Matters went  thus  far  till,  on  the  i8th  of  January,  1863,  one  of  the  Naval  Bri- gade men,  by  an  attempted  familiarity  with  an  Andamanese  woman, provoked  the  anger  of  a  man  of  her  tribe,  who  drew  an  arrow  on  him, and  shot  him  through  the  body,  from  which  he  died.  For  this,  two, Andamanese  were  made  prisoners  and  secured  on  "  Ross  Island."  At length  some  intercourse  was  resumed,  and  a  few  men  and  women  were induced  to  come  over  to  "  Ross  Island  "  to  see  the  prisoners  ;  these were  detained  in  kind  treatment,  and  accommodated  in  a  hut  built  for their  use.  Tliis  intercourse  was  improved  by  the  Revd.  H.  Corbyn, the  Chaplain,  who  at  length,  on  the  30th  of  June,  1863,  took  charge of  these  and  other  visitors  in  the  "  Andaman  Home."  Mr.  Corbyn  now frequently  visited  the  aborigines  on  the  mainland,  and  by  his  humane and  persevering  efforts,  won  much  of  their  confidence  and  regard.
"  Two  Outposts  were  established  on  the  mainland  coast,  a  short  dis- tance North  and  South  of  "  Ross  Island."  Here  huts  were  erected, and  provisions  conveyed  for  them,  and  it  was  hoped  that  some  attempt might  be  made  to  teach  them  to  cultivate  the  soil ;  but  unfortunately in  June,  1864,  an  act  of  violence  on  the  part  of  two  Andamanese  occur- red, who  in  a  fit  of  passion  shot  and  killed  three  convicts,  wounding two  more  with  their  arrows.  It  was  necessary  at  once  that  very  seri- ous notice  should  be  taken  of  such  desperate  acts,  and  to  mark  this, all  intercourse  with  the  Andamanese  was  cut  off  for  three  months.
"  Not  one  was  allowed  to  land  on.  any  part  of  the  Settlement,  and  all supplies  of  food  were  withheld.  At  the  end  of  this  time,  the  abori- gines, under  fixed  rules,  were  again  permitted  to  visit  the  Settlement ; at  first  a  cold  reception  met  all.  This  attitude  and  its  cause  were  well understood  by  them,  the  men  charged  with  the  murderous  acts  de- scribed were  forbidden  the  Settlement,  and  by  degrees  cur  good-will was  as  before  given  to  the  tribe.
"In  June,  1864,  Mr.  Corbyn  resigned  charge  of  the  "  Home  "  and J.  N.  Horn  fray,  Esq.,  Assistant  to  the  Superintendent,  having  volun- teered his  services  to  take  it  up,  he  was  placed  in  charge.
3u2
.}..)•_)  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
"  Since  Mr.  Honifray  has  had  the  "  Andaman  Homes  "  in  his  care, he  has  established  himself  well  with  the  aborigines  visiting  us,  as  they are  now  permitted  to  go  unrestrained,  arid  their  confidence  in  us  has largely  increased.  They  now  bring  over  their  women  and  children  in their  own  canoes  by  which  act,  (it  would  appear  by  their  own  account), they  can  exhibit  no  greater  mark  of  trust  in  us.
"  Mr.  Homfray  has  acquired  a  considerable  knowledge  of  their  lan- guage ;  he  is  well  acquainted  now  with  the  North  and  South  Tribes of  "  South  Andaman,"  with  the  "Rutland"  and  "Archipelago" Islanders,  and  their  Chiefs,  with  whom  he  has  much  influence.  His efforts  on  behalf  of  them  all  have  been  very  successful  in  the  human- ising effect  produced  on  their  manners,  habits,  and  dispositions.  A. ground-work  so  well  established  is  encouraging,  and!  invites  further endeavours  for  their  civilisation."
The  Chief  Commissioner  of  British  Burmali  was  requested  by  the Government  of  India,  in  March  1865,  to  report  upon  our  relations  with the  Andamanese,  and  to  submit  proposals  as  to  our  future  manage- ment of  them.  It  was  suggested  that  one  or  more  European  or  Eura- sian convicts  might  be  employed  in  the  management  and  education ^t  the  Andamanese  children,  if  any  could  be  induced  to  remain  in  the Settlement.  Major  Ford  had  asked  for  the  services  of  an  Army  School- master for  the  Andamanese  School,  but  he  could  not  be  spared,  and, even  if  he  had  been  granted,  his  services  would  probably  hare  been  of little  value.  The  Government  considered  that  a  zealous  missionary would  be  the  best  person  for  this  work,  and  were  willing  to  aid  any such  man,  but  added  that  there  appeared  to  be  little  field  at  the  An- damans  for  missionary  enterprise,  and  that  it  was  improbable  that  such a  man  would  come.
In  reply  to  this  Letter,  the  Chief  Commissioner  of  British  Burmah stated,  in  April,  1855,  that  it  was  of  great  importance  to  reclaim,  the Andamanese  from  their  present  savage  condition,  and,  by  the  force of  good  example  to  gain  such  influence  over  them  as  to  induce  them to  help  shipwrecked  people ;  but  botli  he  and  Major  Eord  objected  to their  being  kept  under  the  charge  of  a  convict.  He  also  doubted  the
•WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  493
propriety  of  any  convicts  being  placed   as  orderlies  or  watchmen over  them,  as  was  then  the  custom.
(It  was  a  pity  that  this  policy  was  not  carried  out.  The  disadvan- tages attendant  on  the  association  of  convicts  with  the  Andamanese was  fully  appreciated  by  both  Colonel  Phayre,  and  Major  Ford,  and the  former  goes  on  to  say)  : —
"  A  European  or  East  Indian  man  and  his  wife  should  be  in  charge of  the  Home,  should  treat  the  adults  of  both  sexes  kindly,  and  as  far as  possible  instruct  the  children.  Each  day's  delay  renders  the  task of  improving  these  people  more  difficult,  for  I  fear  they  are  now contracting  bad  habits.  Archdeacon  Pratt,  on  the  15th  December, 1864,  when  visiting  the  Islands,  recommended  that  a  missionary should  be  appointed  to  instruct  these  people  as  he  would  probably  be the  most  successful.  Under  such  a  regime  the  Chaplain  might  be  the ex-officio  visitor,  and  the  Home  be  under  the  direct  authority  of  the Superintendent.
"  I  have  already  recommended  that  a  school  be  founded  at  the Setttlement  for  convict  and  free  children,  and  1  thought  that  the charge  of  the  Home  might  be  combined  with  the  duty  of  school- master."
The  Government  of  India  did  not  approve  of  this  proposal  and directed  that  Mr.  Homfray,  who  had  already  done  such  good  work with  the  Andamanese,  should  remain  in  charge  of  the  Home.
On  the  1st  April,  1865,  there  were  only  six  convicts  attached  to the  Andaman  Home ;  Mr.  Homfray  endeavoured  to  utilise  the  Anda- manese in  many  ways,  and  they  helped  to  erect  their  o\vn  Home building,  in  which  Major  Ford  would  not  allow  them  to  have  fires at  first,  until  they  refused  to  live  there  without  them.
Mr.  Homfray  at  this  time  began  to  compile  a  vocabulary  of  the Aka-ZteVda  language,  which,  however,  was  never  published.
In  May,  1865,  a  steady  advance  in  friendly  relations  with  the Puchikwdr  and  Akar-Bdle  Tribes  was  noticed.  Mr.  Homfray  used the  already  friendly  Aka-_Z?e«-da  as  intermediaries,  and  in  a  short time  Major  Ford  and  Mr.  Homfray  were  able  to  land  from  the
494  A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
Diana  and  visit   in   a  friendly  manner    the   villages   of   the   above- mentioned  Tribes.
On  one  occasion  Mala  Biala,  the  Chief  of  Rutland  Island,  came on  board  the  Di  ma  and  was  at  once  noticed  to  be  superior  to  the other  Andamanese,  and  to  have  great  influence  with  his  tribesmen, who  soon  became  friendly.  Major  Ford  remarks  regarding  him  : —
"  He  is  very  different  to  any  Andamanese  I  have  yet  seen.  His bearing  is  so  different,  so  superior  to  any  of  them,  his  demeanour  at all  times  quiet  and  composed.  He  has  a  very  intelligent  countenance, and  his  gentleness  of  manner,  so  different  from  the  somewhat  boister- ousness  of  the  Andamanese,  is  as  remarkable  as  it  is  engaging.  "
This  man  similarly  impressed  Mr.  Man,  Major  Protheroe,  and others  who  knew  him,  and  his  death  during  the  epidemic  of  measles in  April,  1877,  was  much  regretted.  On  account  of  his  superiority some  people  seem  to  have  thought  that  he  was  of  mixed  blood,  and  of Indian  parentage  on  the  father's  side,  but  such  was  not  the  case.
During  the  month  of  June,  1865,  the  friendly  relations  with  the tribes  to  the  north  cpntinued,  and  at  one  time  representatives  from four  tribes  were  living  together  amicably  in  the  Home,  a  hitherto unknown  occurrence  among  the  Andamanese.  Mr.  Homfray  made them  bring  in  fish  for  sale,  and  with  their  assistance  extended  the gardens  at  the  Homes  in  the  jungle,  as  by  growing  articles  for  sale in  them  he  was  able  to  add  to  the  Home  Funds,  and  also  by  issuing some  as  food  to  the  Andamanese,  to  decrease  the  expenditure.  He was  most  energetic,  living  for  days  in  jungle  encampments  with  the Andamanese  while  engaged  on  this  work,  and  the  present  Homes  and gardens  at  Tarachang,  Baja-Jag-da,  Gop-1'aka-bdng,  and  Duratdng were  all  established  by  him.
In  his  zeal  he  even  went  so  far  as  to  allow  himself  to  be  painted and  dressed  in  Andamanese  fashion,  and  joined  in  their  dances,  and there  is  no  doubt  that  he  was  really  attached  to  this  people  personally, and  they  to  him.
On  the  1st  July,  1865,  Jacko,  the  Chief  of  the  North  Tribe,  died  of
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  495
pneumonia.  Before  his  death  he  confessed  to  Mr.  Homfray  that  ho and  Moriarty  were  the  two  men  who  had  killed  the  three  convicts  in June,  3864,  at  the  North  Outpost.
His  funeral  took  place  on  the  following  day,  and  is  thus  described by  Mr.  Homfray  : —
"  The  Andamanese,  espacially  those  of  his   tribe   and  family,   felt his  death  very  much,  and  cried  for  several  days   after    whenever   they thought  of   him.     He  left  two   sisters,  who   were  much  attached  to him,  and  were  married,  and  they  were  present,  and  carefully  attenled on   him,  on   his  death  bed.     They  were  the  chief  mourners,  and  their husbands  had  to  bury  him.     He  died  in  the  morning   at   6   A.M.   and was  rolled  up   in   a  ball   in   the  same  way  as  a  child  in  his  mother's womb.     He    \v;is   buried   at   Perseverance  Point    on    account   of   his brother   having   been  buried  there  formerly,  and   the  two  sisters  and brothers  in-law   attended   to   the   burial.     The    females  were   much affected  at  their  loss  and  were   crying   bitterly  while   their   husbands were  digging  the  grave.     This  Mas  about  two  feet  deep,  a  little  above high  water  mark,  and  in  it  they  placed  the   corpse   in   a  half  sitting position,   with   his   face    upwards   looking  towards  the  east.     He  was kept  in  the  hall  shape  as  when  first  rolled  up,  and  the  grave  was   not more  than   two  feet  square.     Previous  to  covering  him  up,  they  took the  last  farewell  peep  at  his   face,   blowing   gently  on   his  eyes   and forehead.     He  was  then  covered  over  with  not  more  than  six    inches of  earth,  and  some  stones  were   placed  on  the   grave.     A   bundle    of burning  faggots  was  placed  over  this,   and   mourning   garlands   were fixed  at  conspicuous  parts  of  the  shore,   as   signals   of  an   interment. This  form  of  funeral  has  invariably  been  carried  out  by  all  with  slight alterations,   according   to   the   dignity  and   respect   of   the  deceased. After  fcnir  months  the  nearest  of  kin  goes  to  the   grave  and   fetches away  the  lower  jaw,  which  is  ahout  that  time  freed  from   the  flesh ; a  month  after,  the  shoulder  bone  and  ribs  are  extracted,  and  after  six months  the  skull,  which  is  then  clear  of  all  the  brain,  is  taken,  and slung  round  the  neck  of  the  principal  mourner.  After  a  while,  every- body has  a  turn  in  carrying  it  about.     Should  a  stranger  die  among them,  and  none  of  his  tribe   or   family  be  present,  he  is  entirely
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
neglected  and  not  a  bit  cared  for,  and  that  is  one  of   the  reasons  for their  always  keeping  together  in  families."
Mr.  Homfray  at  the  time  of  writing  this  was  evidently  unaware that  the  Andamanese  also  used  "  Platform  "  hurial,  and  that  it  was considered  more  honourable  than  interment  in  the  earth.
The  following  notes  on  the  customs  of  the  Andamanese  are  ex- tracted from  his  reports  at  this  time  :  —
"  The  marriage  ceremony  is  simple,  yet  binding  on  the  Andaman- ese. A  lad  of  sixteen  engages  himself  to  a  girl  of  thirteen  of  a different  family,  with  the  consent  of  the  girl's  guardian  who  is generally  the  Chief  of  the  tribe.  At  their  first  meeting  they  stare  at each  other  while  seated  quietly  by  themselves.  At  night  the  Chief takes  the  newly  married  couple  by  their  hands,  and  joins  them together,  after  which  they  retire  to  the  jungle  for  their  honeymoon, and  the  next  time  they  meet  all  the  people  there  is  a  great  dance. The  married  couple  keep  together  till  death.  '
This  account  is  meagre  and  incorrect,  and  with  other  remarks  of Mr.  Homfray's  regarding  the  marriage  customs  of  the  Andamanese published  further  on,  has  misled  several  enquirers  who  naturally accepted  Mr.  Homfray's  statements  as  those  of  the  best  authority.
He  remarks  that  "  in  the  making  of  their  canoes  it  was  formerly supposed  that  fire  was  greatly  used  in  burning  the  log  out,  instead  of scooping  it  out,  but  I  can  now  clearly  state  that  the  whole  of  the work  is  done  with  an  adze  :  after  picking  out  and  felling  a  good  tree in  a  convenient  place,  a  number  of  them  assemble  together  and  in turn  assist  in  the  work,  while  others  have  to  search  for  food.  In  ten days  to  a  fortnight  the  boat  is  launched,  and  when  at  leisure  the amusement  is  to  finish  it  off  to  a  very  light  condition,  barely  being in  some  parts  half  an  inch  thick.  This  is  done  with  great  care,  and it  so  improves  the  boat,  that  with  one  paddle  she  is  able  to  move about  at  a  good  pace.  They  always  ballast  the  canoe  with  a  few stones,  otherwise  it  is  likely  to  turn  over,  as  she  has  no  bearings,  and is  not  opened  out  as  are  the  Burmese  canoes.  A  good  sized  boat could  carry  twenty  Andamanese  at  a  time.  Of  the  canoes  about  here,
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  497
none  have  outriggers  or  sails,  but  I  believe  those  among  the  islands to  the  north  have  them,  and  are  better  and  larger  ones."
(On  the  contrary,  the  canoes  of  the  northern  tribes  are  smaller,  and not  so  safe  or  commodious.  The  Andainanese  do  not  use  sails  in their  canoes. — M.  V.  P.)
In  August,  1865,  Mr.  Homfray  took  an  Andamanese  man  and  his wife,  and  some  children,  to  Calcutta  with  him.  During  his  absence the  following  instance  of  hospitality  on  the  part  of  the  Andamanese occurred.  Prisoner  Peterson,  with  a  Parawallah  of  the  Homes,  went to  the  jungle  for  fibre  for  the  use  of  the  Homes,  and  landed  on  the mainland  west  of  Chatham.  They  were  met  by  a  large  number  of Andamanese,  who  received  them  in  a  most  friendly  manner,  gave them  a  feast  of  roasted  iguana,  shell-fish,  and  water,  and  on  leaving gave  them  jungle  pigs,  and  a  large  fish,  assisted  them  to  procure  what they  required,  and  accompanied  them  to  their  boat.
On  Mr.  Houif ray's  return  the  Andamanese  crowded  in  to  meet him,  and  were  much  excited  at  the  accounts  of  Calcutta  given  by those  who  had  been  there.
On  the  7th  August,  18G5,  the  Chief  Commissioner  of  British Burmah,  when  writing  about  the  Andamanese  to  the  Government  of India,  states  that  they  had  acquired  great  confidence  in  visiting  the Settlement.  Mr.  Homfray's  plan  of  teaching  them  to  plant  coconuts and  to  wait  for  their  gradual  growth  had  been  partially  successful and  of  course  such  matters  can  only  be  gradually  taught.  (The garden  of  coconuts  at  Tarachang  was  planted  at  this  time.)  The Chief  Commissioner  did  not  approve  of  the  Superintendent  of  Port Blair  granting  convicts  to  the  Andaman  Home  in  order  to  teach  the Andamanese  how  to  cultivate,  and  thought  that  Mr.  Homfray  could not  do  better  than  by  going  on  as  he  was  then  working.
The  attempt  to  teach  the  Andamanese  cultivation  has  never  been successful,  and  as  the  Chief  Commissioner  suggested,  had  better  have been  left  alone  from  the  beginning,  so  far  as  associating  convicts  with the  Andamanese  for  that  purpose  was  concerned  ;  but  in  January, 1866,  he  wrote  to  Major  Ford  that,  if  the  Andamanese  could  be  taught agriculture,  it  would  be  very  desirable.  He  suggested  that  Major
3i
498
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
Ford  should  give  them  a  plot  of  ground  and  test  them  by  saying  "  we will  give  you  no  plantains,  but  those  you  grow  in  the  garden  may  be yours  ".
On  the  24th  October,  1865,  Major  Ford,  when  writing  to  the Government  to  ask  for  a  station  steamer  to  be  permanently  stationed at  Port  Blair,  urges  the  necessity  of  guarding  shipwrecked  crews,  and adds  that  Malay  piratical  craft,  heavily  armed  and  manned,  hang about  the  Andaman  Islands,  evidently  for  no  good  purpose  as  they have  false  papers.
He  states  : — "  I  learn  from  the  Andamanese,  who  always  evince alarm  at  the  approach  of  such  craft,  that  it  is  on  board  such  as  these that  their  countrymen  are  kidnapped  away  to  Atcheen,  Siam,  and elsewhere.  The  Andamanese  assert  these  practices  still  exist.  "
In  November,  1865,  Mr.  Homfray,  with  the  view  apparently  of obtaining  a  larger  grant  for  the  Homes,  more  land,  and  a  larger  staff of  convicts  to  work  on  it,  reported  that  he  thought  he  was  losing ground  with  the  Andamanese.  He  considered  that  this  was  because he  could  not  give  them  enough  presents,  and  urged  that  they  were better  treated  in  Mr.  Corbyn's  time,  in  this  respect,  as  there  was  then an  allowance  of  R200  per  mensem  to  feed  only  forty  of  them ;  the Settlement  gardens  were  then  flourishing,  200  convict  gardeners being  employed  in  them,  and  many  fruits  could  be  spared  to  be  given to  the  Andamanese  who,  therefore,  got  for  nothing  what  they  now had  to  buy  from  the  self-supporters.  The  convict  establishment  at the  Homes  in  Mr.  Corbyn's  time  was  forty  men,  and  with  this  staff cows  and  pigs  could  be  kept,  and  by  their  sale  a  profit  made  which was  credited  to  the  Home  Fund.  After  enumerating  many  other privileges  which  Mr.  Corbyn  had  enjoyed,  he  begged  for  the  same,  or, if  not  allowed  to  have  them,  asked  to  be  permitted  to  close  the Homes,  as  he  stated  the  Andamanese  on  Ross  Island  got  nothing  but rice  to  eat,  and,  on  account  of  this  poor  diet,  he  thought  four  of  them died,  and  the  rest  were  discontended  and  uneasy.  There  was  no special  reason  for  this  complaint,  and  Major  Ford  took  little  notice  of it,  merely  telling  Mr.  Homfray  to  go  on  as  he  was  going,  and  that  he was  doing  very  well  (as  indeed  he  was).
•WITH  THE  ANUAMANESE.  499
During  the  year  he  had  been  in  charge,  no  rows  had  occurred,  and he  had  taught  the  Andamanese  to  work  for  us,  and  encouraged  them by  gifts  of  adzes,  etc.,  to  use  our  tools  in  making  their  canoes.
Mr.  Corbyn  was  still  in  the  Settlement  at  this  time  (not  leaving it  till  early  in  1866,  when,  after  an  interval,  he  was  succeeded,  on the  3rd  November  1866,  by  the  Revd.  T.  F.  L.  Warneford),  ana Mr.  Homfray  experienced  some  difficulty  in  keeping  on  good  terms with  him  owing  to  his  continued  interference  with  the  Andamanese, On  one  occasion  he  objected  to  Mr.  Corbyn  taking  away  their  goods, particularly  "a  large  canoe,  which  Mr.  Corbyn  said  he  had  bought  for a  knife!  Similar  complaints  were  made  against  Captain  Laugliton, the  Executive  Commissariat  Officer,  and  the  matter  had  to  be reported  to  the  Superintendent,  as  Mr.  Homfray  thought  the  Anda. manese  would  begin  to  give  trouble  again,  if  looted  in  this  manner.
In  January,  1866,  Mr.  Homfray  commented  on  the  wandering ways  of  the  Andamanese,  and  hoped  to  get  them  to  settle  down  to agriculture.  He  also  noted  their  former  distrust,  timidity,  and treachery,  and  was  doubtful  about  the  possibility  of  their  conversion to  Christianity,  as  he  said  they  had  no  word  for,  or  conception  of,  an Almighty,  do  not  think  about  him,  and  would  not  care  to  know  of one  :  "There  are  many  other  things  to  teach  them  before  all  this.  "'
He  adds  :  —
"  The  Andamanese  will  never  be  able,  without  our  help,  to  clear, cultivate,  and  build  houses,  and  for  the  first  two  years  we  should help  them  to  start,  with  convict  labour,  in  four  different  spots  in  the jungle  near  some  creek  where  they  generally  encamp.  By  care  and kindness  their  fancy  might  be  drawn  to  the  scheme,  and  no  provoca- tion or  compulsion  should  be  used.  Persons  should  not  be  allowed to  visit  their  homes  and  deprive  them  of  their  goods.  The  Anda- manese resent  this,  which  is  the  reason  of  their  hiding  their  goods  in the  jungle."
He  also  gave  the  want  of  food  and  insecurity  of  property  as  the reasons  for  their  nomadic  habits.
The  uncleanly  habits  of  the  Andamanese  might  have  been included  as  another  reason  for  their  nomadism.  To  attempt  to
3  i  2
500  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
change  such  a  people  into  an  agricultural  race,  by  a  mere  order  and a  little  assistance  in  the  building  of  houses,  was  absurd.  Genera- tions would  have  to  pass  before,  with  the  greatest  care,  the  change could  be  effected,  if  indeed  it  could  be  done  at  all.  Many  similar attempts  were  made  in  after  years,  but  were  finally  abandoned,  owing to  the  rapidly  approaching  extinction  of  the  race.  The  above  is  an interesting  instance  of  the  attempts  so  universally  made  by  the English-speaking  peoples  to  fit  other  races  into  their  narrow  and often  unsuitable  customs.  In  1887,  a  very  distinguished  officer, who,  many  years  before  had  been  connected  officially  with  the Andamans,  asked  me  whether  the  Andamanese  had  settled  down,  and taken  to  agriculture.  I  told  him  that  I  had  abandoned  all  efforts in  that  direction,  for  1  could  not  see  that  they  would  confer  any benefit  on  the  savages,  or  were  likely  to  yield  the  desired  result.  His answer  was  "  they  should  have  been  made  to  do  it !  ".
In  February,  1866,  a  man  of  the  Akar-_Ba/<?  Tribe  was  brought  to the  Home  for  the  first  time.  These  people  have  since  always  proved very  friendly  towards  us,  and  are  among  the  best  natured  of  the Andamanese.
At  this  time  the  so  called  South  Tribe  were  living  at  Boroinj- Gudar,  and  the  North  Tribe  were  at  Lekera-Barnga,  and  representa- tives of  both  these  Septs  were  living  at  the  Home  on  Ross  Island.
Two  men,  "  Daura  "  of  the  South  Tribe  (called  Jim,)  and  "  Punga  " of  the  North  Tribe  (called  Jumbo)  had  a  fight  near  the  Ross  Island jetty  about  some  pork  which  the  latter  would  not  give  up  to  the former.  Jim  shot  Jumbo  in  the  stomach,  killing  him,  and  then swam  across  to  Aberdeen,  and  fled  into  the  jungle.  Jumbo  was buried  by  Mr.  Homfray  and  the  Andamanese  at  the  Home,  at Aberdeen.
Jim  had  witnessed  the  hanging  of  two  conviuts  for  murder,  and was  well  aware  that  the  punishment  for  murder  was  death,  so  Mr. Homfray  recommended  that  he  should  be  hanged  as  an  example,  to teach  the  others  to  govern  their  tempers  and  not  murder  people  for trifles,  admitting  at  the  same  time  that  the  Andamanese  are  very quick  tempered.  He  pointed  out,  as  a  curious  fact,  that,  of  the
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
501
eight  Andamanese  Mr.  Corbyn  took  with  him  to  Calcutta  in  Novem- ber, 1865,  two  were  drowned,  one  was  murdered,  one  had  died  a natural  death,  and  four,  of  whom  two  were  murderers,  were  still  in the  Settlement.
Major  Ford  did  not  approve  of  Mr.  Homfray's  proposal  to  hang Jim,  so  the  latter  suggested  that  he  should  be  sent  to  Burmah  for  a year,  as  were  Crusoe  and  Eriday  in  Major  Haughton's  time,  to  be under  the  care  of  some  Government  schoolmaster  or  chaplain  there, to  be  taught  English,  and  be  so  trained  that  on  his  return  to  the Andamans  he  could  be  made  some  use  of.  This,  however,  was  not done.
Jim  remained  by  himself  in  hiding  in  the  jungle,  and  Mr.  Hom- fray  sent  out  a  notice  to  the  other  Andamanese  of  his  tribe  that when  caught  he  would  be  punished.  Jumbo's  friends  connived  at Jim's  escape  and  refused  to  assist  Mr.  Homfray  in  apprehending  him as,  angry  as  they  were  with  Jim,  and  anxious  to  wreak  their  own vengeance  on  him,  they  did  not  wish  to  see  him  hanged.  Mr.  Hom- fray was  under  the  impression,  though  wrongly,  that  Moriarty was  sheltering  Jim,  so  turned  him  away  from  the  Settlement  on  this account.  Moiiarty  felt  this  unjust  treatment,  and  a  short  time afterwards  came  to  Mr.  Homfray  with  a  present  of  some  honey- combs, asking  him  to  allow  him  to  again  visit  the  Home.  Mr. Homfray  noticed  that,  at  this  time,  the  Andamanese  used  to  bring in  pan  leaves,  and  jungle  canes  for  the  coaviat  Parawallahs  of  the Andaman  Homes,  who  ordered  them  to  do  so.  There  can  be  no doubt  that,  from  this  time  onward,  the  convicts  had  considerable power  over  the  Andamanese,  who  thought  that  the  former  had  the ear  of  Mr.  Homfray,  and  ill-treatment  of  the  men  and  intrigues  with the  women  were  common,  resulting  in  the  latter  case  in  the  introduc- tion of  syphilis  among  the  race,  an  evil  Mr.  Homfray  never  seemed to  have  feared,  or  made  any  attempt  to  guard  against.  The  Burmese convicts  had  by  this  time  taught  the  Andamanese  to  use  dogs  for  pig hunting,  and  they  had  also  all  taken  to  tobacco  smoking.
502  A  HISFORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
The  Sept  of  the  Aka-JBe'a-da  living  in  Port  Campbell  now  came to  the  Home,  and  Mr.  Homfray  regarded  them  as  the  most  powerful among  the  South  Andaman  Septs.  He  states  that  "  the  Andamanese suffer  much  from  chest  diseases  at  the  commencement  of  the  rainy season,  and  approve  of  our  treatment  of  them  when  they  are  ill."
By  March  1866,  he  was  slightly  acquainted  with  all  the  tribes  of the  South  Andaman  Group  (except  the  Aukau-</«Mw  and  Kol)  and their  Septs  which  he  considered  to  be  separate  Tribes.  He  noticed that  each  Sept  had  a  Chief,  and  that  the  Septs  quarrelled  with  each other;  also  that  they  had  head-quarter  stations  where  stores  were accumulated  and  the  sick  were  kept.  He  states  that,  in  a  quarrel the  Andamanese  separate  to  avoid  a  fight,  keep  apart  for  some  time and  then  patch  up  a  peace.
During  the  month  of  March  an  Andamanese  from  a  Northern Tribe  died  at  the  Home,  and  being  a  stranger  the  other  Andamanese would  take  no  trouble  about  him,  but  let  Mr.  Homfray  bury  him.
The  following  report  on  the  Andamanese  for  the  year  1865-66 by  Lieutenant.  Colonel  B.  Ford,  Superintendent  of  Port  Blair,  is inserted  in  full  : —
"  The  intercourse  that  has  been  held  with  the  Andamanese,  during the  year  under  report,  has  been  satisfactory.  Mr.  Homfray,  in  charge of  the  "  Andaman  Home,"  has  great  influence  and  control  amongst them,  and  has  done  much  to  advance  the  good  understanding  which now  exists  generally  between  the  Andamanese  and  the  inhabitants  of the  Settlement.  Several  visits  have  been  made  during  the  year  under report  to  the  aborigines  on  localities  which  are  distant  from  the Settlement.  On  the  first  opportunity,  the  Andamanese  of  the  Archi- pelago were  visited  on  Outram  Island,  on  which  occasion  the  Super- intendent met  them  accompanied  by  several  officers  of  the  Settlement. The  following  is  Mr.  Homfray's  account  of  the  meeting : — -
"  As  our  boat  approached  the  shore,  four  of  the  Andamanese  came out  from  the  jungle,  apparently  preparing  their  arrows  to  fire  on  us, when  I  hailed  them,  threatening  them  if  they  attempted  to  fire,  that  I should  punish  them.  There  were  four  Andamanese  with  us  who  ac- companied our  party  in  the  boat,  who  I  knew  well  and  could  be depended  on.  They  did  their  best  to  explain  to  those  on  shore,  by calling  to  them  from  the  bows  of  the  boat,  that  we  were  friendly, having  brought  them  food  and  presents,  and  told  them  that  if  they
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  503
aimed  any  arrows  at  the  boat,  they  would  be  the  sufferers,  as  we  had muskets  prepared  to  meet  any  hostility.  It  was  not  until  after  15 minutes  talking  and  every  possible  show  of  friendship,  (keeping  the boat  out  of  reach),  that  they  laid  down  their  weapons,  giving  them  up to  our  Andamanese,  who  swam  to  the  shore  and  brought  off  the  bows and  arrows  to  us.
"  We  then  landed  guarded  by  Marine  Service  men,  and  remained on  shore  some  time.  There  were  20  men,  women,  and  children,  appar- ently of  one  family ;  all  appeared  to  be  in  good  condition.  They  had also  a  canoe  with  some  articles  in  it  that  must  have  been  carried  off by  runaway  convicts,  in  their  possession.
"  The  women  and  children  at  the  first  sight  of  the  rifles,  which  were out  of  view  as  far  as  was  possible,  were  frightened  and  hid  themselves. It  is  very  curious  that  with  them,  as  I  make  out,  the  presence  of  women should  be  an  indication  of  peace,  and  it  was  noticeable  that,  as  soon as  the  women  came  forward,  the  men  thought  it  time  to  lay  down  their arms,  and  become  peaceably  disposed.  We  gave  them  a  good  many presents  and  food,  at  which  they  seemed  pleased.  Where  I  landed,  I planted  young  cocoanuts,  plantains,  and  pineapple  shoots,  and  several kinds  of  seeds,  of  which  I  had  brought  a  supply."
"The  second  meeting  was  held  shortly  afterwards  with  the  Rutland Islanders.  The  Chief  of  this  Tribe,  that  of  the  south  coast,  named Myo-ba-la-lah  (Mala  Biala. — M.  V.  P.)  (Myo  being  a  prefix  signifying a  friend)  is  a  most  remarkable  man.  His  bearing  being  so  different and  superior  to  that  of  any  other  of  the  Andamanese  that  have  yet been  seen ;  his  demeanour  is  at  all  times  quiet  and  composed.  He  is tall  and  good-looking,  having  a  very  intelligent  countenance,  and  his gentleness  of  manner,  so  opposite  to  the  somewhat  boisterousness  of the  Andamanese  generally,  is  as  remarkable  as  it  is  engaging.  On  this occasion  there  was  no  mistrust ;  the  Southern  Tribe  people  coming on  board  the  steamer  in  the  most  confident  manner.  Mr.  Homfray thus  describes  the  meeting  : —
"  Three  canoes  filled  with  Andamanese  came  off  to  the  steamer. The  crews  came  on  board,  and  after  enjoying  themselves  on  meeting with  their  friends,  and  partaking  of  the  food  and  presents  that  were
A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  GELATIONS
given  them,  invited  me  on  shore.  I  went  with  my  party,  and  was surprised  to  see  their  large  camp,  with  a  family  group  of  about  50,  in half  a  dozen  huts,  with  canoes,  bows  and  arrows,  knives,  several  pieces of  iron,  an  old  32  Ib.  shot,  (Government  property),  and  so:ne  fine  turtles •which  abound  there,  and  are  principally  their  food.  On  account  of there  being  a  shoal,  the  boat  was  not  able  to  get  there,  when  one  of the  chiefs  came  and  carried  me  on  shore  on  his  back.
"  The  first  amusement  was  a  great  dance,  in  which  my  party  of Andamanese  had  to  join.  After  a  couple  of  hours,  we  returned  to  the steamer,  bringing  away  several  articles  which  they  exchanged  with  us for  food,  beads,  and  old  iron.  Sixteen  souls  of  this  place  accompanied us  back  to  Ross  ;  some  of  my  party  were  related  to  them,  and  remained behind."
"  Mr.  Homfray  shortly  after  again  visited  this  Tribe  ontlie  occasion
of  his  search  for  a  lost  boat.     He  found  it,  (he  says),  but  the  Anda-
manese had  cut  out  of  the  boat  pieces  of  iron  thereby  injuring  it  to  a
considerable  extent.     "  I  found  some  of  them  near  the  boat,  who  were
pointed  out  by  the  runaways,  (convicts),  as  being  those  who  took  away
the  boat  and  provisions  from  them.     They  at  first  feigned  surprise   at
being  taxed  with  this,  but  afterwards  confessed  that  they  were  guilty,
and  offered  to  compensate  me  with  their  own  canoe  for  the  injury
done  to  the  boat.     I  at  first  doubted  their  sincerity,  and  sent  the  canoe
back  to  them  after  a  day  with  some  food,  but,  to  my  surprise,  when  at
anchor  on  the  east  side  of  Macpherson's  Straits,  on  the  afternoon  of
that  day,  by  the  bird's  nest  cave,  and  while  watering  the  ship,  they
brought  the  canoe  off  a  second  time  to  the  steamer,  and  were  particu-
lar in  explaining  to  me,  that  the  canoe  was  no  longer  theirs.     I  was
glad  to  see  that  they  understood  what  wrong  they  had  done,  and  were
sorry  for  it."
"  Later  in  the  year  Mr.  Homfray  visited  the  Port  Mouat  tribe  at that  place.  On  this  occasion  ho  had  the  opportunity  of  making  the acquaintance  of  Oo-loo-golo,  (Wologa  Jola.  —  M.V.P.}  the  Chief  of  the tribe  resident  about  Cape  Bluff.  Mr.  Homfray  thus  describes  his meeting  with  the  tribe  :  "  As  I  was  reaching  the  end  of  the  Port  Mouat road,  I  perceived  in  the  Harbour  a  canoe  with  a  number  of  Andaman-
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.
ese  in  it.  On  hailing  them,  they  instantly  advanced,  and  were  glad  at meeting  me.  They  took  me  over  in  their  canoe  to  their  camp  on  the sea  shore  by  Grub  Island,  a  distance  of  five  miles  to  sea  from  the  roa'l to  Port  Blair  (on  the  mainland  at  Port  Mouat),  where  I  met  a  number of  them,  who  were  familiar  with  and  glad  to  see  me.
"  During  the  day,  I  was  fed  with  the  fruit,  (sappota),  (?)  and  fish, which  the  women  got  at  low  water  for  me  amongst  the  rocks.  Some of  the  men  went  out  hunting  pigs,  and  some  a  few  miles  further  to the  south,  where  they  were  making  a  canoe.  I  returned  in  the  even- ing with  a  number  of  them  in  their  canoes,  amongst  whom  were  the Chiefs.  They  brought  me  to  the  shore  north  of  Port  Mouat,  being anxious  to  visit  friends  there."
"  Lastly,  Mr.  Homfray  visited  the  tribe  resident  in  the  vicinity  of Port  Campbell  on  the  western  coast.  Not  only  did  he  on  this  occasion meet  them,  but  many  aborigines  also  coming  from  20  miles  further north  from  that  place.  Of  this  meeting,  Mr.  Homfray  states  : —
"  Wherever  I  met  with  the  Andamanese,  they  welcomed  me,  as they  had  all  seen  me  before  at  the  Home.  I  was  surprised  myself  in having  met  my  friends  so  high  up  the  coast.  They  gave  me  all  the information  I  required,  as  also  some  fish,  and  showed  me  fresh  water springs,  which  quite  refreshed  me."
"  Of  other  circumstances  connected  with  this  trip,  more  information will  be  given  further  on.  The  visits  of  the  Andamanese  to  the  Home established  on  Ross  Island,  have  been  both  numerous  and  frequent during  the  year.
"  Several  Chiefs  have  also  been  encouraged  to  come  in  and  visit  the Superintendent,  amongst  others,  Myo-ba-la-lah,  (Mala  Biala),  the Chief  of  the  Southern  Tribe;  the  Chief  of  Middle  Straits,  Dos-may- blee,  (Meba) ;  the  Chief  of  Cape  Bluff,  Oo-loo-golo  (Wologa  Jola) ;  the Chief  of  the  North  Tribe,  Jacko  ;  the  Port  Campbell  Chief,  and  the Port  Mouat  Chief,  while  the  chiefs  of  tribes  living  nearer  about  Port Blair,  have  constantly  been  into  the  Settlement.  On  one  occasion  no less  than  the  heads  of  five  tribes,  with  a  number  of  followers  were assembled  on  Ross  Island.  The  occasion  was  that  of  the  introduction of  some  20  men  of  the  Eastern  Archipelago  Tribe,  who  made  their  first
3l
506
A  HISTOBV  OF  OUK  RELATIONS
visit  to  the  Settlement,  they  being  brought  over  by  our  oldest  friends the  people  of  the  North  Tribe.  There  were  thus,  the  North,  South, Port  Mouat,  the  Rutland,  and  the  Eastern  Archipelago  Tribes,  all assembled  at  the  Home.  "  Such  a  meeting,"  Mr.  Homfray  observes "  I  am  confident  never  occurred  ere  this,  even  amongst  themselves, bringing  with  them,  as  they  did,  such  a  large  number  of  their  different families."
"  The  new  comers  appeared  surprised  at  meeting  so  many  people  of different  tribes  in  one  place,  as  well  as  the  state  of  harmony  that appeared  to  exist  amongst  all.  They  were  greatly  amused,  of  course, with  everything  that  they  saw  :  the  whole  party  occupied  themselves in  feasting,  dancing,  fishing,  and  hunting  excursions.  The  new  visit- ors remained  a  week,  after  which  time  they  appeared  anxious  to  re- turn home,  being  like  all  new  comers,  somewhat  timid.  They  went off  in  great  spirits,  in  their  three  canoes  that  they  brought  with  them, taking  many  presents,  and  assured  of  the  good  will  of  the  Govern- ment and  Superintendent  towards  them.
"  A  good  understanding  now  exists  with  nine  tribes,  North  tribe South  tribe,  Rutland  Islanders,  Port  Mouat  tribe,  Port  Campbell  tribe, Middle  Straits  tribe,  Middle  Andamaus  tribe,  (!  ?)  Eastern  Archipel- ago tribe,  and  Labyrinth  Islanders,  having  Chiefs  or  Elders,  whom  all the  rest  respect  and  obey.  There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  the friendly  treatment  they  have  received  in  the  Settlement  is  now  known throughout  the  Middle  Andamans,  and  that  by  next  year  the  Settle- ment may  be  visited  by  their  chiefs,  by  whose  assistance  a  friendly acquaintance  will,  it  is  hoped,  be  made  with  the  tribes  of  North  Anda- man. It  will  then  remain  to  acquire  some  knowledge  of  the  tribes  of the  interior  of  the  Islands,  located  somewhat  more  on  the  north-west coast,  as  also  of  the  inhabitants  of  Little  Andaman,  lying  some  20 miles  south  of  Rutland  Island.  Mr.  Homfray  remarks  that  "  it  is extraordinary  how  our  kindness  has  drawn  these  savages  even  on  mere hearsay  to  flock  in,  and  put  themselves  under  our  charge,  and  who would,"  he  believes,  "  willingly  give  themselves  over  to  our  entire care."  This  is  good  progress  with  people  who,  a  couple  of  years  ago, would  have  fled  from  us  or  fired  on  us  if  followed.  (As  soon  as
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  507
friendly  relations  were  established  with  one  Tribe  of  a  Group,  they were  extended  in  time  to  the  remaining  Tribes  in  that  Group  as  a matter  of  course. — M.  V.  P.)
"The  question  naturally  occurs/what'return  have  we  received  for all  this  kindness  lavished  upon  these  Islanders.  To  expect  a  direct return  from  the  untutored  savage  would  be  absurd,  but  indirectly this  conciliatory  trpntment  of  them  tends  to  do  good.  To  expect  labour (i.e.,  manual  field  labour)  is  equally  out  of  the  question,  at  all  events at  this  early  stage  of  our  intercourse  with  them.  To  remove  their  fear of  the  strangers  upon  their  shores  has  been  no  small  task.
"  There  was  a  time  when  they  dreaded  the  appearance  of  a  sail  or the  landing  of  a  human  being  upon  their  shores  .with  a  skin  less  black than  their  own.  Such  comers,  mostly  from  the  Malayan  Islands,  sought the  Andamans  but  to  seize  and  capture  the  Islanders  for  sale  as  slaves at  the  Courts  of  "  Siam,"  "  Atcheen,"  or  "  Cambodia.-1'  These  were adventures  of  risk  ;  what  wonder  then  that  the  savage  drew  his  bow upon  the  stranger  that  would  rob  him  of  his  kin,  or  that  the  pirate fought  fiercely  to  retain  the  unfortunate  victim  within  his  grasp. Thus  the  Islanders  regarded  all,  save  those  who  were  joint  occupants of  the  land  they  lived  in,  as  their  enemies ;  and  thus  it  was  that  when the  storm-driven  vessel  was  thrown  a  wreck  upon  their  island  reefs they  and  their  tribes,  exasperated  by  former  wrongs,  also  their  natural cupidity  intensely  excited  in  view  of  the  plunder  thrown  within  their grasp,  would  fall  upon  the  lost  and  weary  mariner,  now  an  easy  victim and  make  the  wreck  their  own.  Thus  it  is  that  the  belief  exists,  even in  these  days,  amongst  seafaring  people  even  of  education,  that  the "  Andaman  Islanders  •"  are  blood-thirsty  and  ruthless  cannibals  !
"In  the  intercourse  that  has  been  held  with  the  Andamanese  during the  past  two  years,  particularly  latterly,  it  has  been  the  desire  of  the Superintendent,  in  which  he  has  been  ably  seconded  by  Mr.  Horn  Pray, to  make  these  poor  people  understand  that  all  new  comers  on  their shores  are  their  friends  and  not  their  enemies.  That  the  kidnapping that  once  prevailed  is  now  no  longer  tolerated,  and  that  every  protec- tion will  be  afforded  them  therefrom.  That  information  should  always be  given  by  them,  of  all  foreigners  that  they  might  find  in  distress,  no
3i2
A  HISTORY  OF  OUIl  RELATIONS
matter  of  what  colour.  That  they  should  succour  them,  and  that  re- ward would  be  sure  to  follow  ;  and  there  are  strong  grounds  for  hop- ing, from  their  bearing  towards  the  inhabitants  generally  of  this  Settle- ment, whether  within  its  limits  or  at  a  distance  from  it,  that  those  who might  hereafter  be  unhappily  cast  away  upon  the  shores  of  the  "  An- clanians,"  would  not  only  meet  with  forbearance,  if  not  kindly  treat- ment from  them.  That  they  have  much  disposition  so  to  act,  and  are willing  to  be  useful,  may  be  inferred  from  the  following  occurrences which  have  taken  place  at  various  times  during  the  year  under  report.
"  In  the  early  part  of  the  year  Mr.  Homfray  had  occasion  to  proceed to  Port  Mouat,  for  the  purpose  of  endeavouring  to  intercept  some  run- away Burmese  convicts.  40  Andarnanese  on  his  invitation  accom- panied him,  and  "  gave  him  all  the  information  that  he  wished  for,"  and though  the  search  was  then  unsuccessful  as  regards  the  capture  of  the Burmese,  they  busied  themselves  in  searching  for,  and  found  indica- tions of  their  recent  presence  in  Port  Mouat,  which  they  guided  Mr. Homfray  towards,  and  showed  him.
"  On  another  occasion,  the  Andamanese,  discovering  a  party  of escaped  Burmese  constructing  a  canoe  on  the  western  coast,  voluntarily came  and  gave  Mr.  Homfray  information  of  the  fact,  offering  to  guide him  to  the  spot.
"Again,  Mr.  Homfray  being  out  some  eight  miles  north  of  Ross Island  endeavouring  to  intercept  some  runaways,  and  landing  on  seeing some  fires  on  the  shores,  was  entirely  surrounded  by  a  number  of armed  Andamanese.  So  soon  as  they  saw  who  he  was,  "Crusoe"  (as  he is  called  here)  the  head  of  their  party,  at  once  in  friendly  spirit  gave over  his  bow  and  arrows  to  Mr.  Homfray,  and  carried  him  and  his  party to  their  camp,  where  they  spent  the  night  in  rude  but  hearty  and  hos- pitable demonstrations  of  welcome,  rejoicing  with  dancing  and  singing, in  their  way,  until  daylight.
"In  the  month  of  April,  1865,  the  Andamanese  brought  Mr.  Hom- fray information  of  having  seen  certain  runaways  steering  through Middle  Straits,  who  they  noticed  making  their  way  to  Strait  Island, and  it  was  in  pursuit  of  these  men  that  they,  accompanying  Mr.  Horn-
WITH  THE  ANDAMANESE.  r;0g
fray  so  far  as  Port  Campbell,  afforded  him  information  as  to  the  where- abouts of  four  other  runaway  convicts,  towards  whose  concealment they  lei  Mr.  Homfray,  and  actually  assisted  him  in  their  capture. This  was  very  satisfactory.
"  On  two  occasions  also,  finding  runaway  convicts  in  the  jungles,  the one  a  half-witted  creature,  probably  reduced  to  that  state  by  priva- tions, and  the  other  in  a  shockingly  emaciated  and  weak  state  from the  same  cause,  while  wandering  without  sustenance  in  the  wilds  of  the forests,  the  Andamanese  brought  them  in  towards  Viper  Island,  and when  near  that  place  one  of  the  aborigines  went  across  to  the  Island and  gave  information  to  the  Overseer  of  the  proximity  of  these  escaped convicts,  who  thereon  was  enabled  to  send  out  for  and  bring  them  in.
"  Again,  under  Mr.  Homfray's  orders  attached  to  the  "  Andaman Home"  was  a  prisoner  named  Peterson.  This  man  accompanied  by one  or  two  natives  of  India  had  been  sent  out  to  the  jungles  to  bring in  some  fibre  material  and  had  wandered  to  some  distance  on  the  main- land  west  of  Chatham  Island  when  they  were  unexpectedly  met  by  a large  number  of  Andamanese,  who  came  out  from  the  forest  and  met them  in  a  very  friendly  manner,  took  them  to  their  camp,  and  there offered  them  a  meal  which  was  specially  prepared  for  them,  nor  wera they  content  with  this  display  of  hospitality,  for  while  thus  entertain- ing them  others  went  hunting  and  fishing,  and  having  accompanied and  assisted  them  in  procuring  a  supply  of  the  fibre  that  they  required, they  presented  them  with  the  results  of  their  sport,  and  accompanied Peterson  and  his  party  to  their  boat  on  their  return,  and  it  may  be  con- sidered that  no  better  proof  of  the  friendly  feeling  now  existing  amongst them  towards  those  they  know  could  be  shown,  than  this  unexpected and  spontaneous  offer  of  hospitality  on  the  part  of  the  Andamanese.
"  It  was  no  uncommon  thing,  until  recently,  when  convicts  might be  returning  from  foresting,  for  the  Andamanese  to  hang  about  their track,  and  surrounding  any  straggler,  to  deprive  him  of  his  axe  or  dah. The  convicts  now  say  that  the  Andamanese  never  molest  them ;  and some  of  the  Burmese  who  supposed  that  the  Aborigines  had  a  particu- lar ill-feeling  towards  them  (from  their  resemblance  to  the  Malays, who  in  their  former  piratical  excursions  to  these  shores  caused  such
A  HISTORY  OF  OUR  RELATIONS
alarm  and  hatred  of  themselves  amongst  these  Islanders)  now  describe frequent  and  friendly  visits  of  the  Andamanese  to  their  camps.
"Now  perhaps  of  all  convicts  none  get  on  so  well  together  as  the Burmans  do  with  the  Aborigines,  and  neither  appear  to  have  any  fear of  the  other  in  their  jungle  meetings.
"  During  the  year  Mr.  Homfray  has  taken  much  pains  to  acquire  a knowledge  of  the  Andamanese  tongue.  He  now  talks  to  them  freely and  both  seem  readily  to  understand  each  other.  He  has  the  material which  will  be  of  very  great  use  in  compiling  a  vocabulary.  A  convict munshi  and  three  parawallahs  also  have  acquired  some  knowledge  of the  language  of  the  Andamanese,  and  can  make  themselves  pretty  well understood  by,  and  are  successful  in  managing,  them.
"The  Superintendent  and  Mr.  Homfray  have  made  many  efforts  to induce  the  Aborigines  to  bring  in  bamboos,  thatch,  wild  fruit,  and game,  etc.,  for  barter,  but  so  far  as  these  efforts  have  been  made,  they have  not  been  very  successful.  If  the  Andamanese  could  be  utilised in  this  way,  such  supplies  would  meet  with  a  ready  market.  But strange  though  the  statement  may  appear,  these  people  do  not  seem  to have  any  capability  of  counting,  nor  ia  it  found  that  they  have  any words  expressive  of  numerals  in  their  language.  Efforts  have  been made  frequently  to  teach  them,  by  placing  bundles  of  tobacco,  biscuit, beads,  etc.,  in  certain  numbers  or  parcels  before  them,  and  placing bamboos  or  other  articles  desired  of  them  opposite.  That  exchange  was wanted  they  could  understand,  but  the  number  of  this  or  that  article required  for  such  exchange,  they  could  not  be  made  to  compre- hend.
"  Mr.  Homfray,  who  is  very  patient  with  them,  has  not  been  able  to make  them  count  beyond  four  or  five.  Under  circumstances  so  disad- vantageous to  them,  it  is  almost  better  to  refrain  from  attempts  to  bar- ter with  them,  rather  than  that  they  should  think  themselves  under any  compulsion,  or,  (though  unintentionally),  unfairly  treated  with. But  they  have  still  made  themselves  useful  in  other  ways  also  ;  on  one occasion  their  assistance  was  of  much  value  in  endeavours  that  were being  made  to  lift  a  valuable  lighter  that  had  sunk  laden  with  stone. They  had  assisted  in  heaving  her  up,  and  at  length  by  diving  got  out
WITH   THB  ANDAMANESE.
511
her  ballast  and  lightened  her.     These  people  can  dive  and  bring  up comparatively  heavy  weights  from  a  depth  of  six  fathoms.
"  On  another  occasion  their  cleverness  in  diving  was  turned  to  a  good account,  by  employing  them  to  clear  the  screw  of  H.  M.'s  Steamer Dalhousie,  which  was  jammed  by  the  coiling  about  it  of  a  hawser,  all efforts  having  failed  to  free  the  same.    These  people  successfully  accom- plished this  very  difficult  work  for  the  reward  of  a  few  biscuits.    They have  been  taught  to  make  mats,  at  which  work  they  are  very  handy , and  did  a  good  deal  in  that  way  in  the  construction  of  the  Andaman Home  on  Ross  Island.
*'  It  may  also  be  mentioned  that  they  have  been  always  very  useful in  affording  information  as  regards  the  practicability  of  creeks,  course of  streams,  and  jungle  routes.  They  are  also  anxious  to  show  tha  trees, the  wood,  bark,  or  roots  of  which  they  make  use,  the  earth  they  use  for colouring  their  utensils,  canes,  and  fibres,  edible  plants,  etc.  All  this information  will  come  to  good  account  when  more  time  can  be  spared for  explorations  into  the  interior.
"  In  the  month  of  August  Mr.  Homfray,  having  occasion  to  visit Calcutta  on  duty,  was  permitted  to  take  seven  of  the  Andamanese with  him.  He  speaks  very  highly  of  their  good  behaviour  while  away from  Port  Blair,  and  describes  them  as  greatly  interested  in  the  new and  various  objects  they  encountered  or  were  taken  to  see.
"  In  the  month  of  April,  1866,  a  party  of  Andamanese  at  Mr.  Horn- fray's  request  were  permitted  to  accompany  him  on  the  occasion  of  a steamer  being  sent  to  Barren  Island.  It  appears  that  they  were  greatly surprised  at  the  sight  of  the  volcano  on  this  island,  for  which  it  would seem,  (though  some  of  the  Archipelago  Tribe  were  on  board),  they  had no  name,  nor  had  they  ever  heard  of  the  Island  before.
"It  is  gratify  ing  to  report  that  since  June,  I86i,  there  has  not  been one  single  act  of  violence  on  the  part  of  the  Andamanese  towards  any of  the  inhabitants  on  the  Settlement.  One  case  of  murder  is  known, however,  to  have  occurred  among  themselves.  On  Ross  Island  a  lad of  the  South  Tribe,  in  a  quarrel  at  night  with  one  of  the  North  Tribe about  some  food,  stabbed  him  in  the  stomach  with  a  piece  of  iron,  and immediately  took  to  the  water,  and  swam  to  the  mainland.  He  has
512  A  HISTORY  OP  OUR  RELATIONS
since  been  apprehended,  and  is  in  custody  on  Ross  Island  pending  a reference  to  Government.
"  Endeavours  have  been  made  by  the  Superintendent  and  Mr.  Horn- fray  to  arrive  at  some  approximate  estimate  of  the  Aboriginal  popula- tion of  these  Islands,  but  it  is  impossible  to  obtain  any  facts  on  the subject.
"  Mr.  Homfray  is  of  opinion  that  the  whole  of  the  tribes  of  the  Great Andamans  cannot  far  exceed  3,000  souls  in  population.
4-91 6?
v.l
i  ortman,  Maurice  Vidal
A  history  of  our  relations
